2.1 INTRODUCTION
On 15 August 1947, India woke to a
new dawn of freedom. Finally we were
masters of our own destiny after
some two hundred years of British
rule; the job of nation building was
now in our own hands. The leaders
of independent India had to decide,
among other things, the type of
economic system most suitable for
our nation, a system which would
promote the welfare of all rather than
a few. There are different types of
economic systems (see Box 2.1) and
among them, socialism appealed to
Jawaharlal Nehru the most. However,
he was not in favour of the kind of
socialism established in the former
Soviet Union where all the means of
production, i.e. all the factories and
farms in the country, were owned by
the government. There was no private
property. It is not possible in a
democracy like India for the
government to change the ownership
pattern of land and other properties
of its citizens in the way that it was
done in the former Soviet Union.
Nehru, and many other leaders and
thinkers of the newly independent
India, sought an alternative to the
extreme versions of capitalism and
socialism. Basically sympathising with
the socialist outlook, they found the
answer in an economic system which,
in their view, combined the best
features of socialism without its
drawbacks. In this view, India would
be a socialist society with a strong
public sector but also with private
property and democracy; the government
would plan (see Box 2.2) for the
economy with the private sector being
encouraged to be part of the plan effort.
The ‘Industrial Policy Resolution’ of
1948 and the Directive Principles of
the Indian Constitution reflected
this outlook. In 1950, the Planning
Commission was set up with the
Prime Minister as its Chairperson. The
era of five year plans had begun.


Box 2.1: Types of Economic Systems
Every society has to answer three questions
Ø What goods and services should be produced in the country?
Ø How should the goods and services be produced? Should producers use
more human labour or more capital (machines) for producing things?
ØHow should the goods and services be distributed among people?
One answer to these questions is to depend on the market forces of
supply and demand. In a market economy, also called capitalism, only those
consumer goods will be produced that are in demand, i.e., goods that can
be sold profitably either in the domestic or in the foreign markets. If cars
are in demand, cars will be produced and if bicycles are in demand, bicycles
will be produced. If labour is cheaper than capital, more labour-intensive
methods of production will be used and vice-versa. In a capitalist society
the goods produced are distributed among people not on the basis of what
people need but on the basis of Purchasing Power—the ability to buy goods
and services. That is, one has to have the money in the pocket to buy it. Low
cost housing for the poor is much needed but will not count as demand in
the market sense because the poor do not have the purchasing power to
back the demand. As a result this commodity will not be produced and
supplied as per market forces. Such a society did not appeal to Jawaharlal
Nehru, our first prime minister, for it meant that the great majority of people
of the country would be left behind without the chance to improve their
quality of life.
A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally different
manner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to be
produced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the
government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the
desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. The
government decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be
distributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be based
on what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlike
under capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care
to all its citizens. Strictly, a socialist society has no private property since
everything is owned by the state. In Cuba and China, for example, most of
the economic activities are governed by the socialistic principles.
Most economies are mixed economies, i.e. the government and the
market together answer the three questions of what to produce, how to
produce and how to distribute what is produced. In a mixed economy, the
market will provide whatever goods and services it can produce well, and
the government will provide essential goods and services which the market
fails to do.


Box 2.2: What is a Plan?
A plan spells out how the resources of a nation should be put to use. It
should have some general goals as well as specific objectives which are to
be achieved within a specified period of time; in India plans were of five
years duration and were called five year plans (we borrowed this from the
former Soviet Union, the pioneer in national planning). Our plan documents
upto the year 2017 not only specify the objectives to be attained in the five
years of a plan but also what is to be achieved over a period of twenty years.
This long-term plan is called ‘perspective plan’. The five year plans were
supposed to provide the basis for the perspective plan.
It will be unrealistic to expect all the goals of a plan to be given equal
importance in all the plans. In fact the goals may actually be in conflict. For
example, the goal of introducing modern technology may be in conflict with
the goal of increasing employment if the technology reduces the need for
labour. The planners have to balance the goals, a very difficult job indeed.
We find different goals being emphasised in different plans in India.
India’s five year plans did not spell out how much of each and every
good and service is to be produced. This is neither possible nor necessary
(the former Soviet Union tried to do this and failed). It is enough if the plan
is specific about the sectors where it plays a commanding role, for instance,
power generation and irrigation, while leaving the rest to the market.


2.2 THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS
A plan should have some clearly
specified goals. The goals of the five
year plans were: growth, modernisation,
self-reliance and equity. This does not
mean that all the plans have given
equal importance to all these goals.
Due to limited resources, a choice has
to be made in each plan about which
of the goals is to be given primary
importance. Nevertheless, the planners
have to ensure that, as far as possible,
the policies of the plans do not
contradict these four goals. Let us now
learn about the goals of planning in
some detail.
Growth: It refers to increase in the
country’s capacity to produce the
output of goods and services within
the country. It implies either a
larger stock of productive capital,
or a larger size of supporting
services like transport and
banking, or an increase in the
efficiency of productive capital and
services. A good indicator of
economic growth, in the language of
economics, is steady increase in the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The
GDP is the market value of all the
final goods and services produced in
the country during a year. You have
studied this concept in Class X as
well. You can think of the GDP as a
cake and growth is increase in the
size of the cake. If the cake is larger,
more people can enjoy it. It is
necessary to produce more goods
and services if the people of India are
to enjoy (in the words of the First Five
Year Plan) a more rich and varied life.
The GDP of a country is derived
from the different sectors of the
economy, namely the agricultural
sector, the industrial sector and the
service sector. The contribution
made by each of these sectors makes
up the structural composition of
the economy. In some countries,
growth in agriculture contributes
more to the GDP growth, while in
some countries the growth in the
service sector contributes more to
GDP growth (see Box 2.4).
Modernisation: To increase the
production of goods and services
the producers have to adopt new
technology. For example, a farmer can
increase the output on the farm by
using new seed varieties instead of
using the old ones. Similarly, a factory
can increase output by using a new
type of machine. Adoption of new
technology is called modernisation.
However, modernisation does not
refer only to the use of new technology
but also to changes in social outlook
such as the recognition that women
should have the same rights as men. In
a traditional society, women are
supposed to remain at home while men
work. A modern society makes use of
the talents of women in the work place
— in banks, factories, schools etc. —
and such a society in most occassions
is also prosperous.
Self-reliance: A nation can promote
economic growth and modernisation
by using its own resources or by
using resources imported from other
nations. The first seven five year plans
gave importance to self-reliance
which means avoiding imports
of those goods which could be
produced in India itself. This policy
was considered a necessity in order to
reduce our dependence on foreign
countries, especially for food. It is
understandable that people who were
recently freed from foreign domination
should give importance to self-
reliance. Further, it was feared that
dependence on imported food
supplies, foreign technology and
foreign capital may make India’s
sovereignty vulnerable to foreign
interference in our policies.
Equity: Now growth, modernisation
and self-reliance, by themselves, may
not improve the kind of life which
people are living. A country can have
high growth, the most modern
technology developed in the country
itself, and also have most of its people
living in poverty. It is important to
ensure that the benefits of economic
prosperity reach the poor sections as
well instead of being enjoyed only by
the rich. So, in addition to growth,
modernisation and self-reliance,
equity is also important. Every Indian
should be able to meet his or her basic
needs such as food, a decent house,
education and health care and
inequality in the distribution of wealth
should be reduced.
Let us now see how the first seven
five year plans, covering the period
1950-1990, attempted to attain these
four goals and the extent to which
they succeeded in doing so, with
reference to agriculture, industry
and trade. You will study the policies
and developmental issues taken up
after 1991 in Chapter 3.

Box 2.3: Mahalanobis: the Architect of Indian Planning
Many distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of India’s five
year plans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta Chandra
Mahalanobis, stands out.
Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five Year
Plan. The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planning
in general, laid down the basic ideas regarding
goals of Indian planning; this plan was based
on the ideas of Mahalanobis. In that sense, he
can be regarded as the architect of Indian
planning.
Mahalanobis was born in 1893 in Calcutta.
He was educated at the Presidency College in
Calcutta and at Cambridge University in
England. His contributions to the subject of
statistics brought him international fame. In
1945 he was made a Fellow (member) of
Britain’s Royal Society, one of the most
prestigious organisations of scientists; only the
most outstanding scientists are made
members of this Society.
Mahalanobis established the Indian
Statistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta and
started a journal, Sankhya, which still serves
as a respected forum for statisticians to
discuss their ideas. Both, the ISI and Sankhya, are highly regarded by
statisticians and economists all over the world to this day.
During the second plan period, Mahalanobis invited many
distinguished economists from India and abroad to advise him on India’s
economic development. Some of these economists became Nobel Prize winners
later, which shows that he could identify individuals with talent. Among
the economists invited by Mahalanobis were those who were very critical of
the socialist principles of the second plan. In other words, he was willing to
listen to what his critics had to say, the mark of a great scholar.
Many economists today reject the approach to planning formulated by
Mahalanobis but he will always be remembered for playing a vital role in
putting India on the road to economic progress, and statisticians continue
to profit from his contribution to statistical theory.

Box 2.4: The Service Sector
As a country develops, it undergoes ‘structural change’. In the case of India,
the structural change is peculiar. Usually, with development, the share of
agriculture declines and the share of industry becomes dominant. At higher
levels of development, the service sector contributes more to the GDP than the
other two sectors. In India, the share of agriculture in the GDP was more than
50 per cent—as we would expect for a poor country. But by 1990 the share of
the service sector was 40.59 per cent, more than that of agriculture or industry,
like what we find in developed nations. This phenomenon of growing share of
the service sector was accelerated in the post 1991 period (this marked the
onset of globalisation in the country which will be discussed in chapter 3).

Box 2.5: Ownership and Incentives
The policy of ‘land to the tiller’ is based on the idea that the cultivators will
take more interest — they will have more incentive — in increasing output if
they are the owners of the land. This is because ownership of land enables the
tiller to make profit from the increased output. Tenants do not have the incentive
to make improvements on land since it is the landowner who would benefit
more from higher output. The importance of ownership in providing incentives
is well illustrated by the carelessness with which farmers in the former Soviet
Union used to pack fruits for sale. It was not uncommon to see farmers packing
rotten fruits along with fresh fruits in the same box. Now, every farmer knows
that the rotten fruits will spoil the fresh fruits if they are packed together. This
will be a loss to the farmer since the fruits cannot be sold. So why did the
Soviet farmers do something which would so obviously result in loss for them?
The answer lies in the incentives facing the farmers. Since farmers in the
former Soviet Union did not own any land, they neither enjoyed the profits nor
suffered the losses. In the absence of ownership, there was no incentive on
the part of farmers to be efficient, which also explains the poor performance of
the agricultural sector in the Soviet Union despite availability of vast areas of
highly fertile land.


2.3 AGRICULTURE
You have learnt in Chapter 1 that
during the colonial rule there was
neither growth nor equity in the
agricultural sector. The policy makers
of independent India had to address
these issues which they did through
land reforms and promoting the use
of ‘High Yielding Variety’ (HYV) seeds
which ushered in a revolution in
Indian agriculture.
Land Reforms: At the time of
independence, the land tenure system
was characterised by intermediaries
(variously called zamindars, jagirdars
etc.) who merely collected rent from
the actual tillers of the soil without
contributing towards improvements
on the farm. The low productivity of
the agricultural sector forced India to
import food from the United States of
America (U.S.A.). Equity in agriculture
called for land reforms which primarily
refer to change in the ownership of
landholdings. Just a year after
independence, steps were taken to
abolish intermediaries and to make the
tillers the owners of land. The idea
behind this move was that ownership
of land would give incentives (see Box
2.5) to the tillers to invest in making
improvements provided sufficient
capital was made available to them.
Land ceiling was another policy to
promote equity in the agricultural
sector. This means fixing the maximum
size of land which could be owned by
an individual. The purpose of land
ceiling was to reduce the concentration
of land ownership in a few hands.
The abolition of intermediaries
meant that some 200 lakh tenants
came into direct contact with the
government — they were thus
freed from being exploited by the
zamindars. The ownership conferred
on tenants gave them the incentive to
increase output and this contributed
to growth in agriculture. However, the
goal of equity was not fully served
by abolition of intermediaries. In
some areas the former zamindars
continued to own large areas of land
by making use of some loopholes in
the legislation; there were cases
where tenants were evicted and the
landowners claimed to be self-
cultivators (the actual tillers), claiming
ownership of the land; and even when
the tillers got ownership of land, the
poorest of the agricultural labourers
(such as sharecroppers and landless
labourers) did not benefit from land
reforms.
The land ceiling legislation also
faced hurdles. The big landlords
challenged the legislation in the
courts, delaying its implementation.
They used this delay to register their
lands in the name of close relatives,
thereby escaping from the
legislation. The legislation also had
a lot of loopholes which were
exploited by the big landholders to
retain their land. Land reforms were
s u c c e s s f u l i n K e r a l a a n d We s t
Bengal because these states had
governments committed to the policy
of land to the tiller. Unfortunately
other states did not have the same
level of commitment and vast
inequality in landholding continues
to this day.
The Green Revolution: At
independence, about 75 per cent of
the country’s population was
dependent
on
agriculture.
Productivity in the agricultural sector
was very low because of the use of old
technology and the absence of
required infrastructure for the vast
majority of farmers. India’s
agriculture vitally depends on the
monsoon and if the monsoon fell short
the farmers were in trouble unless
they had access to irrigation facilities
which very few had. The stagnation in
agriculture during the colonial rule
was permanently broken by the green
revolution. This refers to the large
increase in production of food grains
resulting from the use of high yielding
variety (HYV) seeds especially for
wheat and rice. The use of these seeds
required the use of fertiliser and
pesticide in the correct quantities as
well as regular supply of water; the
application of these inputs in correct
proportions is vital. The farmers who
could benefit from HYV seeds required
reliable irrigation facilities as well as
the financial resources to purchase
fertiliser and pesticide. As a result, in
the first phase of the green revolution
(approximately mid 1960s upto mid
1970s), the use of HYV seeds was
restricted to the more affluent states
such as Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu. Further, the use of HYV
seeds primarily benefited the wheat-
growing regions only. In the second
phase of the green revolution
(mid-1970s to mid-1980s), the HYV
technology spread to a larger number
of states and benefited more variety
of crops. The spread of green
revolution technology enabled India
to achieve self-sufficiency in food
grains; India no longer had to be
at the mercy of America, or any
other nation, for meeting its food
requirements.
Growth in agricultural output is
important but it is not enough. If a
large proportion of this increase is
consumed by the farmers themselves
instead of being sold in the market,
the higher output will not make much
of a difference to the economy as a
whole. If, on the other hand, a
substantial amount of agricultural
produce is sold in the market by the
farmers, the higher output can make
a difference to the economy. The
portion of agricultural produce which
is sold in the market by the farmers
is called marketed surplus. A good
proportion of the rice and wheat
produced during the green revolution
period (available as marketed
surplus) was sold by the farmers in
the market. As a result, the price of
food grains declined relative to other
items of consumption. The low-
income groups, who spend a large
percentage of their income on food,
benefited from this decline in relative
prices. The green revolution enabled
the government to procure sufficient
amount of food grains to build a stock
which could be used in times of food
shortage.
While the nation had immensely
benefited from the green revolution, the
technology involved was not free from
risks. One such risk was the possibility
that it would increase the disparities
between small and big farmers—since
only the big farmers could afford the
required inputs, thereby reaping most
of the benefits of the green revolution.
Moreover, the HYV crops were also more
prone to attack by pests and the small
farmers who adopted this technology
could lose everything in a pest attack.
Fortunately, these fears did not
come true because of the steps taken
by the government. The government
provided loans at a low interest rate
to small farmers and subsidised
fertilisers so that small farmers could
also have access to the needed
inputs. Since the small farmers could
obtain the required inputs, the
output on small farms equalled the
output on large farms in the course
of time. As a result, the green
revolution benefited the small as well
as rich farmers. The risk of the small
farmers being ruined when pests
attack their crops was considerably
reduced by the services rendered by
research institutes established by the
government. You should note that
the green revolution would have
favoured the rich farmers only if the
state did not play an extensive role
in ensuring that the small farmer
also gains from the new technology.
The Debate Over Subsidies: The
economic justification of subsidies in
agriculture is, at present, a hotly
debated question. It is generally
agreed that it was necessary to use
subsidies to provide an incentive for
adoption of the new HYV technology
by farmers in general and small
far mers in particular. Any new
technology will be looked upon as
being risky by farmers. Subsidies
were, therefore, needed to encourage
farmers to test the new technology.
Some economists believe that once
the technology is found profitable
and is widely adopted, subsidies
should be phased out since their
purpose has been served. Further,
subsidies are meant to benefit the
farmers but a substantial amount of
fertiliser subsidy also benefits the
f e r t i l ise r i n d u s t r y ; a n d a m o n g
farmers, the subsidy largely benefits
the farmers in the more prosperous
regions. Therefore, it is argued that
there is no case for continuing with
fertiliser subsidies; it does not benefit
the target group and it is a huge
burden on the government’s finances
(see also Box 2.6).
On the other hand, some believe
that the government should continue
with agricultural subsidies because
farming in India continues to be a risky
business. Most farmers are very poor
and they will not be able to afford the
required inputs without subsidies.
Eliminating subsidies will increase the
inequality between rich and poor
farmers and violate the goal of equity.
These experts argue that if subsidies
are largely benefiting the fertiliser
industry and big farmers, the correct
policy is not to abolish subsidies but
to take steps to ensure that only the
poor farmers enjoy the benefits.
Thus, by the late 1960s, Indian
agricultural productivity had increased
sufficiently to enable the country to be
self-sufficient in food grains. This is an
achievement to be proud of. On the
negative side, some 65 per cent of the
country’s population continued to be
employed in agriculture even as late as
1990. Economists have found that as
a nation becomes more prosperous, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture as well as the proportion of
population working in the sector
declines considerably. In India,
between 1950 and 1990, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture declined significantly but
not the population depending on it
(67.5 per cent in 1950 to 64.9 per cent
by 1990). Why was such a large
proportion of the population engaged
in agriculture although agricultural
output could have grown with much
less people working in the sector? The
answer is that the industrial sector and
the service sector did not absorb the
people working in the agricultural
sector. Many economists call this an
important failure of our policies
followed during 1950-1990.





Box 2.6: Prices as Signals
You would have learnt in an earlier class about how prices of goods are
determined in the market. It is important to understand that prices are signals
about the availability of goods. If a good becomes scarce, its price will rise and
those who use this good will have the incentive to make efficient decisions
about its use based on the price. If the price of water goes up because of lower
supply, people will have the incentive to use it with greater care; for example,
they may stop watering the garden to conserve water. We complain whenever
the price of petrol increases and blame it on the government. But the increase
in petrol price reflects greater scarcity and the price rise is a signal that less
petrol is available— this provides an incentive to use less petrol or look for
alternate fuels.
Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicate
the supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided at a subsidised
rate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity.
Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, although
the water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further
deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity,
farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticide
subsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to the
environment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources.
Think about subsidies in terms of incentives and ask yourself whether it is
wise from the economic viewpoint to provide free electricity to farmers.


2.4 INDUSTRY AND TRADE
Economists have found that poor
nations can progress only if they have
a good industrial sector. Industry
provides employment which is more
stable than the employment in
agriculture; it promotes modernisation
and overall prosperity. It is for this
reason that the five year plans placed
a lot of emphasis on industrial
d e v e l o p m e n t . Yo u m i g h t h a v e
studied in the previous chapter that,
at the time of independence, the
variety of industries was very narrow
— largely confined to cotton textiles
and jute. There were two well-
managed iron and steel firms — one
in Jamshedpur and the other in
Kolkata — but, obviously, we needed
to expand the industrial base with a
variety of industries if the economy
was to grow.
Public and Private Sectors in Indian
Industrial Development: The big
question facing the policy makers was
— what should be the role of the
government and the private sector in
industrial development? At the time of
independence, Indian industrialists did
not have the capital to undertake
investment in industrial ventures
required for the development of Indian
economy; nor was the market big
enough to encourage industrialists to
undertake major projects even if they
had the capital to do so. It is principally
for these reasons that the erstwhile
governments had to play an extensive
role in promoting the industrial sector.
In addition, the decision to develop the
Indian economy on socialist lines led
to the policy of the government
controlling the commanding heights of
the economy, as the Second Five Year
plan put it. This meant that the
government would have complete
control of those industries that were
vital for the economy. The policies of the
private sector would have to be
complimentary to those of the public
sector, with the public sector leading
the way.
Industrial Policy Resolution 1956
(IPR 1956): In accordance with the
goal of the state controlling the
commanding heights of the economy,
the Industrial Policy Resolution of
1956 was adopted. This resolution
formed the basis of the Second Five
Year Plan, the plan which tried to
build the basis for a socialist pattern
of society. This resolution classified
industries into three categories. The
first category comprised industries
which would be exclusively owned by
the government; the second category
consisted of industries in which the
private sector could supplement the
efforts of the public sector, with the
government t a k i n g t h e s o l e
responsibility for starting new units;
the third category consisted of the
remaining industries which were to
be in the private sector.
Although there was a category of
industries left to the private sector,
the sector was kept under state
control through a system of licenses.
No new industry was allowed unless
a license was obtained from the
government. This policy was used for
promoting industry in backward
regions; it was easier to obtain a
license if the industrial unit was
established in an economically
backward area. In addition, such
units were given certain concessions
such as tax benefits and electricity
at a lower tariff. The purpose of this
policy was to promote regional
equality.
Even an existing industry had to
obtain a license for expanding
output or for diversifying production
(producing a new variety of goods).
This was meant to ensure that the
quantity of goods produced was not
more than what the economy
required. License to expand
production was given only if the
government was convinced that the
economy required a larger quantity
of goods.
Small-Scale Industry: In 1955, the
Village and Small-Scale Industries
Committee, also called the Karve
Committee, noted the possibility of
using small-scale industries for
promoting rural development. A
‘small-scale industry’ is defined with
reference to the maximum invest-
ment allowed on the assets of a unit.
This limit has changed over a period
o f t i m e . In 1950 a small -scale
industrial unit was one which invested
a maximum of rupees five lakh; at
present the maximum investment
allowed is rupees one crore.
It is believed that small-scale
industries are more ‘labour intensive’
i.e., they use more labour than the
large-scale industries and, therefore,
generate more employment. But these
industries cannot compete with the big
industrial firms; it is obvious that
development of small-scale industry
requires them to be shielded from the
large firms. For this purpose, the
production of a number of products
was reserved for the small-scale
industry; the criterion of reservation
being the ability of these units to
manufacture the goods. They were also
given concessions such as lower excise
duty and bank loans at lower interest
rates.


2.5 TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTION
T h e i n d u s t r i a l p o l i c y t h a t India
adopted was closely related to the
trade policy. In the first seven plans,
trade was characterised by what is
commonly called an inward looking
trade strategy. Technically, this
strategy is called import substi-
tution. This policy aimed at replacing
or substituting imports with domestic
production. For example, instead of
importing vehicles made in a foreign
country, industries would be
encouraged to produce them in India
itself. In this policy the government
protected the domestic industries
from foreign competition. Protection
from imports took two forms: tariffs
and quotas. Tariffs are a tax on
imported goods; they make imported
goods more expensive and discourage
their use. Quotas specify the quantity
of goods which can be imported. The
effect of tariffs and quotas is that they
restrict imports and, therefore, protect
the domestic firms from foreign
competition.
The policy of protection was based
on the notion that industries of
developing countries were not in a
position to compete against the
goods produced by more developed
economies. It was assumed that if the
domestic industries were protected
they would learn to compete in the
course of time. Our planners also
feared the possibility of foreign
exchange being spent on import of
luxury goods if no restrictions were
placed on imports. Nor was any
serious thought given to promote
exports until the mid-1980s.
Effect of Policies on Industrial
Development: The achievements of
India’s industrial sector during the
first seven plans are impressive
indeed. T h e p r o p o r t i o n o f G D P
contributed by the industrial
sector increased in the period from
13 per cent in 1950-51 to 24.6 per cent
i n 1 9 9 0 -9 1 . T h e r i s e i n t h e
industry’s share of GDP is an
important indicator of development.
The six per cent annual growth rate
of the industrial sector during the
period is commendable. No longer
was Indian industry restricted largely
to cotton textiles and jute; in fact, the
industrial sector became well
diversified by 1990, largely due to
the public sector. The promotion
of s m a l l - s c a l e i n d u s t r i e s gave
opportunities to those people who did
not have the capital to start large
firms to get into business. Protection
from foreign competition enabled the
development of indigenous industries
in the areas of electronics and
automobile sectors which otherwise
could not have developed.
In spite of the contribution made
by the public sector to the growth of
the Indian economy, some economists
are critical of the performance of
many public sector enterprises. It was
proposed at the beginning of this
chapter that initially public sector
was required in a big way. It is now
widely held that state enterprises
continued to produce certain goods
and services (often monopolising
them) although this was no longer
required. An example is the provision
of telecommunication service. This
industry continued to be reserved for
the Public Sector even after it was
realised that private sector firms
could also provide it. Due to the
absence of competition, even till the
late 1990s, one had to wait for a long
time to get a telephone connection.
Another instance could be the
establishment of Modern Bread, a
bread-manufacturing firm, as if the
private sector could not manufacture
bread! In 2001 this firm was sold to
the private sector. The point is that
after four decades of Planned
development of Indian Economy no
distinction was made between (i) what
the public sector alone can do and
(ii) what the private sector can also
do. For example, even now only the
public sector supplies national
defense. And even though the private
sector can manage hotels well, yet,
the government also runs hotels. This
has led some scholars to argue that
the state should get out of areas
which the private sector can manage
and the government may concentrate
its resources on important services
which the private sector cannot
provide.
Many public sector firms incurred
huge losses but continued to
function because it is difficult to close
a government undertaking even if it
is a drain on the nation’s limited
resources. This does not mean that
private firms are always profitable
(indeed, quite a few of the public
sector firms were originally private
firms which were on the verge of
closure due to losses; they were then
nationalised to protect the jobs of the
workers). However, a loss-making
private firm will not waste resources
by being kept running despite the
losses.
The need to obtain a license to start
an industry was misused by
industrial houses; a big industrialist
would get a license not for starting a
new firm but to prevent competitors
from starting new firms. The excessive
regulation of what came to be called the
permit license raj prevented certain
firms from becoming more efficient.
More time was spent by industrialists
in trying to obtain a license or lobby
with the concerned ministries rather
than on thinking about how to improve
their products.
The protection from foreign
competition was also being criticised
on the ground that it continued even
after it proved to do more harm than
good. Due to restrictions on imports,
the Indian consumers had to
purchase whatever the Indian
producers produced. The producers
were aware that they had a captive
market; so they had no incentive to
improve the quality of their goods.
Why should they think of improving
quality when they could sell low
quality items at a high price?
Competition from imports forces our
producers to be more efficient.
A few economists also point out
that the public sector is not meant
for earning profits but to promote the
welfare of the nation. The public
sector firms, on this view, should be
evaluated on the basis of the extent
to which they contribute to the welfare
of people and not on the profits they
earn. Regarding protection, some
economists hold that we should
protect our producers from foreign
competition as long as the rich
nations continue to do so. Owing to
all these conflicts, economists called
for a change in our policy. This,
alongwith other problems, led the
government to introduce a new
economic policy in 1991.

2.6 CONCLUSION
The progress of the Indian economy
during the first seven plans was
impressive indeed. Our industries
became far more diversified compared
to the situation at independence. India
became self- suf ficient in food
production thanks to the green
revolution. Land reforms resulted in
abolition of the hated zamindari
system. In industrial sector, many
economists became dissatisfied with
the performance of many public sector
enterprises. Excessive government
regulation prevented growth of
entrepreneurship. In the name of self-
reliance, Indian producers were
protected against foreign competition
and this did not give them the
incentive to improve the quality of
goods that they produced. Indian
policies were ‘inward oriented’ that
failed to develop a strong export
sector. The need for r e f o r m of
economic policy was widely felt in the
context of changing global economic
scenario, and the new economic policy
was initiated in 1991 to make
Indian economy more efficient. This is
the subject of the next chapter.


Recap
Ø After independence, India envisaged an economic system which combines
the best features of socialism and capitalism — this culminated in the mixed
economy model.
Ø All the economic planning has been formulated through five year plans.
Ø Common goals of five year plans are growth, modernisation, self-sufficiency
and equity.
Ø The major policy initiatives in agriculture sector were land reforms and
green revolution. These initiatives helped India to become self-sufficient in
food grains production.
Ø The proportion of people depending on agriculture did not decline as expected.
Ø Import substitution policy initiatives in the industrial sector raised its
contribution to GDP.
Ø One of the major drawbacks in the industrial sector was the inefficient
functioning of the public sector as it started incurring losses leading to
drain on the nation’s limited resources.
