3.1 INTRODUCTION
You have studied in the previous
chapter that, since independence,
India followed the mixed economy
framework by combining the
advantages of the capitalist economic
system with those of the socialist
economic system. Some scholars argue
that, over the years, this policy resulted
in the establishment of a variety of
rules and laws, which were aimed at
controlling and regulating the
economy, ended up instead in
hampering the process of growth and
development. Others state that India,
which started its developmental path
from near stagnation, has since been
able to achieve growth in savings,
developed a diversified industrial
sector which produces a variety of
goods and has experienced sustained
expansion of agricultural output
which has ensured food security.
In 1991, India met with an
economic crisis relating to its external
debt — the government was not
able to make repayments on its
borrowings from abroad; foreign
exchange reserves, which we
generally maintain to import petroleum
and other important items, dropped
to levels that were not sufficient for
even a fortnight. The crisis was
further compounded by rising prices
of essential goods. All these led the
government to introduce a new set of
policy measures which changed the
direction of our developmental
strategies. In this chapter, we will
look at the background of the crisis,
measures that the government has
adopted and their impact on various
sectors of the economy.


3.2 BACKGROUND
The origin of the financial crisis can
be traced from the inefficient
management of the Indian economy
in the 1980s. We know that for
implementing various policies and
its general administration, the
government generates funds from
various sources such as taxation,
running of public sector enterprises
etc. When expenditure is more than
income, the government borrows to
finance the deficit from banks and
also from people within the country
and from international financial
institutions. When we import goods
like petroleum, we pay in dollars
which we earn from our exports.
Development policies required that
even though the revenues were
very low, the government had
to overshoot its revenue to meet
challenges like unemployment,
poverty and population explosion. The
continued spending on development
programmes of the government did not
generate additional revenue. Moreover,
the government was not able to
generate sufficiently from internal
sources such as taxation. When the
government was spending a large
share of its income on areas which do
not provide immediate returns such as
the social sector and defence, there was
a need to utilise the rest of its revenue
in a highly efficient manner. The
income
from
public
sector
undertakings was also not very high to
meet the growing expenditure. At
times, our foreign exchange,
borrowed from other countries and
international financial institutions,
was spent on meeting consumption
needs. Neither was an attempt made to
reduce such profligate spending nor
sufficient attention was given to boost
exports to pay for the growing imports.
In the late 1980s, government
expenditure began to exceed its
revenue by such large margins that
meeting the expenditure through
borrowings became unsustainable.
Prices of many essential goods rose
sharply. Imports grew at a very high
rate without matching growth of
exports. As pointed out earlier, foreign
exchange reserves declined to a level
that was not adequate to finance
imports for more than two weeks.
There was also not sufficient foreign
exchange to pay the interest that
needed to be paid to international
lenders. Also no country or international
funder was willing to lend to India.
India approached the International
Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), popularly
known as World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF),
and received $7 billion as loan to
manage the crisis. For availing the
loan, these international agencies
expected India to liberalise and open
up the economy by removing
restrictions on the private sector,
reduce the role of the government in
many areas and remove trade
restrictions between India and other
countries.
India agreed to the conditionalities
of World Bank and IMF and
announced the New Economic Policy
(NEP). The NEP consisted of wide
ranging economic reforms. The
thrust of the policies was towards
creating a more competitive
environment in the economy and
removing the barriers to entry and
growth of firms. This set of policies
can broadly be classified into two
groups: the stabilisation measures
and the structural reform measures.
Stabilisation measures are short-
term measures, intended to correct
some of the weaknesses that have
developed in the balance of
payments and to bring inflation
under control. In simple words, this
means that there was a need to
maintain sufficient foreign exchange
reserves and keep the rising prices
under control. On the other hand,
structural reform policies are long-term
measures, aimed at improving the
efficiency of the economy and increasing
its international competitiveness by
removing the rigidities in various
segments of the Indian economy. The
government initiated a variety of
policies which fall under three heads
viz., liberalisation, privatisation and
globalisation.


3.3 LIBERALISATION
As pointed out in the beginning,
rules and laws which were aimed at
regulating the economic activities
became major hindrances in growth
and development. Liberalisation was
introduced to put an end to these
restrictions and open various sectors
of the economy. Though a few
liberalisation measures were
introduced in 1980s in areas of
industrial licensing, export-import
policy, technology upgradation,
fiscal policy and foreign investment,
reform policies initiated in 1991 were
more comprehensive. Let us study
some important areas, such as the
industrial sector, financial sector, tax
reforms, foreign exchange markets
and trade and investment sectors
which received greater attention in
and after 1991.
Deregulation of Industrial Sector: In
India, regulatory mechanisms were
enforced in various ways (i) industrial
licensing under which every entrepreneur
had to get permission from government
officials to start a firm, close a firm
or decide the amount of goods
that could be produced (ii) private
sector was not allowed in many
industries (iii) some goods could be
produced only in small-scale industries,
and (iv) controls on price fixation and
distribution of selected industrial
products.
The reform policies introduced in
and after 1991 removed many of
these restrictions. Industrial
licensing was abolished for almost all
but product categories — alcohol,
cigarettes, hazardous chemicals,
industrial explosives, electronics,
aerospace and drugs and pharma-
ceuticals. The only industries which
are now reserved for the public sector
are a part of atomic energy
generation and some core activities
in railway transport. Many goods
produced by small-scale industries
have now been dereserved. In most
industries, the market has been
allowed to determine the prices.
Financial
Sector
Reforms:
Financial sector includes financial
institutions, such as commercial
banks, investment banks, stock
exchange operations and foreign
exchange market. The financial
sector in India is regulated by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI). You may
be aware that all banks and other
financial institutions in India are
regulated through various norms and
regulations of the RBI. The RBI
decides the amount of money that
the banks can keep with themselves,
fixes interest rates, nature of lending
to various sectors, etc. One of the
major aims of financial sector reforms
is to reduce the role of RBI from
regulator to facilitator of financial
sector. This means that the financial
sector may be allowed to take
decisions on many matters without
consulting the RBI.
The reform policies led to the
establishment of private sector banks,
Indian as well as foreign. Foreign
investment limit in banks was raised to
around 74 per cent. Those banks which
fulfil certain conditions have been given
freedom to set up new branches
without the approval of the RBI and
rationalise their existing branch
networks. Though banks have been
given permission to generate resources
from India and abroad, certain
managerial aspects have been retained
with the RBI to safeguard the interests
of the account-holders and the nation.
Foreign Institutional Investors (FII),
such as merchant bankers, mutual
funds and pension funds, are now
allowed to invest in Indian financial
markets.
Tax Reforms: Tax reforms are
concerned with the reforms in the
government’s taxation and public
expenditure policies, which are
collectively known as its fiscal policy.
There are two types of taxes: direct and
indirect. Direct taxes consist of taxes
on incomes of individuals, as well as,
profits of business enterprises. Since
1991, there has been a continuous
reduction in the taxes on individual
incomes as it was felt that high rates of
income tax were an important reason
for tax evasion. It is now widely
accepted that moderate rates of income
tax encourage savings and voluntary
disclosure of income. The rate of
corporation tax, which was very high
earlier, has been gradually reduced.
Efforts have also been made to reform
the indirect taxes, taxes levied on
commodities, in order to facilitate the
establishment of a common national
market for goods and commodities.
In the year 2016, Indian constitution
was amended to empower state
governments and union Government to
come out with laws to impose Goods
and Services Tax. This has led to
introduction of GST in India. This is
expected to generate additional revenue
for the government, reduce tax evasion
and create ‘one nation, one tax and one
market’. Another component of reform
in this area is simplification. In order
to encourage better compliance on the
part of taxpayers, many procedures
have been simplified and the rates also
substantially lowered.
Foreign Exchange Reforms: The first
important reform in the external sector
was made in the foreign exchange
market. In 1991, as an immediate
measure to resolve the balance of
payments crisis, the rupee was
devalued against foreign currencies.
This led to an increase in the inflow of
foreign exchange. It also set the tone to
free the determination of rupee value
in the foreign exchange market from
government control. Now, more often
than not, markets determine exchange
rates based on the demand and supply
of foreign exchange.
Trade and Investment Policy
Reforms: Liberalisation of trade and
investment regime was initiated to
increase international competitiveness of
industrial production and also foreign
investments and technology into the
economy. The aim was also to promote
the efficiency of local industries and
adoption of modern technologies.
In order to protect domestic
industries, India was following a regime
of quantitative restrictions on
imports. This was encouraged through
tight control over imports and by
keeping the tariffs very high. These
policies reduced efficiency and
competitiveness which led to slow
growth of the manufacturing sector.
The trade policy reforms aimed at (i)
dismantling of quantitative restrictions
on imports and exports (ii) reduction
of tariff rates and (iii) removal of
licensing procedures for imports.
Import licensing was abolished except
in case of hazardous and
environmentally sensitive industries.
Quantitative restrictions on imports of
manufactured consumer goods and
agricultural products were also fully
removed from April 2001. Export
duties have been removed to increase
the competitive position of Indian goods
in the international markets.

3.4 PRIVATISATION
It implies shedding of the ownership
or management of a government
owned enterprise. Government
companies are converted into private
companies in two ways (i) by
withdrawal of the government from
ownership and management of
public sector companies and or (ii) by
outright sale of public sector
companies.
Privatisation of the public sector
enterprises by selling off part of the
equity of PSEs to the public is known
as disinvestment. The purpose of the
sale, according to the government,
was mainly to improve financial
discipline and facilitate modernisation.
It was also envisaged that private
capital and managerial capabilities
could be effectively utilised to
improve the performance of the PSUs.
The government envisaged that
privatisation could provide strong
impetus to the inflow of FDI.
The government has also made
attempts to improve the efficiency of
PSUs by giving them autonomy
in taking managerial decisions. For
instance, some PSUs have been
granted special status as maharatnas,
navratnas and miniratnas (see
Box 3.1).


Box 3.1: Navratnas and Public Enterprise Policies
You must have read in your childhood about the famous Navratnas or Nine
Jewels in the Imperial Court of King Vikramaditya who were eminent persons
of excellence in the fields of art, literature and knowledge. In order to improve
efficiency, infuse professionalism and enable them to compete more effectively
in the liberalised global environment, the government identifies PSEs and
declare them as maharatnas, navratnas and miniratnas. They were given greater
managerial and operational autonomy, in taking various decisions to run the
company efficiently and thus increase their profits. Greater operational,
financial and managerial autonomy has also been granted to profit-making
enterprises referred to as miniratnas.
The Central Public Sector Enterprises are designated with different status.
A few examples of public enterprises with their status are as follows:
(i) Maharatnas – (a) Indian Oil Corporation Limited, and (b) Steel Authority of
India Limited, (ii) Navratnas – (a) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
(b) Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited; and (iii) Miniratnas – (a) Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited; (b) Airport Authority of India and (c) Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited.
Many of these profitable PSEs were originally formed during the 1950s
and 1960s when self-reliance was an important element of public policy. They
were set up with the intention of providing infrastructure and direct employment
to the public so that quality end-product reaches the masses at a nominal
cost and the companies themselves were made accountable to all stakeholders.
The granting of status resulted in better performance of these companies.
Scholars allege that instead of facilitating public enterprises in their expansion
and enabling them to become global players, the government partly privatised
them through disinvesment. Of late, the government has decided to retain
them in the public sector and enable them to expand themselves in the global
markets and raise resources by themselves from financial markets.


Box 3.2: Global Footprint!
Owing to globalisation, you might find many Indian companies have expanded
their wings to many other countries. For example, ONGC Videsh, a subsidiary of
the Indian public sector enterprise, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation engaged in
oil and gas exploration and production has projects in 16 countries. Tata Steel, a
private company established in 1907, is one of the top ten global steel companies
in the world which have operations in 26 countries and sell its products in 50
countries. It employs nearly 50,000 persons in other countries. HCL Technologies,
one of the top five IT companies in India has offices in 31 countries and employs
about 15,000 persons abroad. Dr Reddy's Laboratories, initially was a small
company supplying pharmaceutical goods to big Indian companies, today has
manufacturing plants and research centres across the world.



3.5 GLOBALISATION
Although globalisation is generally
understood to mean integration of the
economy of the country with the world
economy, it is a complex phenomenon.
It is an outcome of the set of various
policies that are aimed at transforming
the world towards greater
interdependence and integration. It
involves creation of networks and
activities transcending economic, social
and geographical boundaries.
Globalisation attempts to establish
links in such a way that the
happenings in India can be influenced
by events happening miles away. It is
turning the world into one whole or
creating a borderless world.
Outsourcing: This is one of the
important outcomes of the
globalisation process. In outsourcing,
a company hires regular service from
external sources, mostly from other
countries, which was previously
provided internally or from within the
country (like legal advice, computer
service, advertisement, security —
each provided by respective
departments of the company). As a
form of economic activity, outsourcing
has intensified, in recent times,
because of the growth of fast modes
of communication, particularly the
growth of Information Technology
(IT). Many of the services such as
voice-based business processes
(popularly known as BPO or
call centres), record keeping,
accountancy, banking services, music
recording, film editing, book
transcription, clinical advice or even
teaching are being outsourced by
companies in developed countries to
India. With the help of modern
telecommunication links including the
Internet, the text, voice and visual data
in respect of these services is digitised
and transmitted in real time over
continents and national boundaries.
Most multinational corporations, and
even small companies, are outsourcing
their services to India where they can
be availed at a cheaper cost with
reasonable degree of skill and
accuracy. The low wage rates and
availability of skilled manpower in
India have made it a destination for
global outsourcing in the post-reform
period.
World Trade Organisation (WTO):
The WTO was founded in 1995 as
the successor organisation to the
General Agreement on Trade and
Tariff (GATT). GATT was established
in 1948 with 23 countries as the
global trade organisation to
administer all multilateral
trade agreements by providing
equal opportunities to
all countries in the
international market for
trading purposes. WTO is
expected to establish a
rule-based trading regime
in which nations cannot
place arbitrary restrictions
on trade. In addition, its
purpose is also to enlarge
production and trade of services, to
ensure optimum utilisation of world
resources
and to protect the
environment. The WTO agreements
cover trade in goods as well as services
to facilitate international trade
(bilateral and multilateral) through
removal of tariff as well as non-tariff
barriers and providing greater market
access to all member countries.
As an important member of
WTO, India has been in the forefront
of framing fair global rules,
regulations and safeguards and
advocating the interests of the
developing world. India has kept its
commitments towards liberalisation
of trade, made in the WTO, by
removing quantitative restrictions on
imports and reducing tariff rates.
Some scholars question the
usefulness of India being a member of
the WTO as a major volume of
international trade occurs among the
developed nations. They also say that
while developed countries file
complaints over agricultural subsidies
given in their countries, developing
countries feel cheated as they are forced
to open their markets for developed
countries but are not allowed access to
the markets of developed countries.
What do you think?

3.6 INDIAN ECONOMY DURING REFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT
The reform process has completed
three decades since its introduction.
Let us now look at the performance
of the Indian economy during this
period. In economics, the growth of
an economy is measured by the Gross
Domestic Product. Look at Table 3.1.
The post–1991 India witnessed a
rapid growth in GDP on a continual
basis for two decades. The growth
of GDP increased from 5.6 per cent
during 1980–91 to 8.2 per cent
during 2007–12. During the reform
period, the growth of agriculture has
declined. While the industrial sector
reported fluctuation, the growth of the
service sector has gone up. This
indicates that GDP growth is mainly
driven by growth in the service sector.
During 2012-15, there has been a
setback in the growth rates of different
sectors witnessed post–1991. While
agriculture recorded a high growth rate
during 2013–14, this sector witnessed
negative growth in the subsequent
year. While the service sector
continued to witness a high level of
growth — higher than the overall GDP
growth in 2014–15, this sector
witnessed the high growth rate of 9.8
per cent. The industrial sector
witnessed a steep decline during 2012–
13, in the subsequent years it began
to show a continuous positive growth.
The opening of the economy has
led to a rapid increase in foreign direct
investment and foreign exchange
reserves. The foreign investment,
which includes foreign direct
investment (FDI) and foreign
institutional investment (FII), has
increased from about US $100 million
in 1990-91 to US $ 30 billion in
2017-18. There has been an increase
in the foreign exchange reserves from
about US $ 6 billion in 1990-91 to
about US $ 413 billion in 2018-19.
India is one of the largest foreign
exchange reserve holders in the world.
Since 1991, India is seen as a
successful exporter of auto parts,
pharmaceutical goods engineering
goods, IT software and textiles. Rising
prices have also been kept under
control.
On the other hand, the reform
process has been widely criticised
for not being able to address some
of the basic problems facing our
economy especially in areas of
employment, agriculture, industry,
infrastructure development and fiscal
management.
Growth and Employment: Though
the GDP growth rate has increased in
the reform period, scholars point out
that the reform-led growth has not
generated sufficient employment
opportunities in the country. You will
study the link between different aspects
of employment and growth in the
next unit.
Reforms in Agriculture: Reforms
have not been able to benefit
agriculture, where the growth rate has
been decelerating.
Since 1991, public investment in
agriculture sector especially in
infrastructure, which includes
irrigation, power, roads, market
linkages and research and extension
(which played a crucial role in the
Green Revolution), has fallen. Further,
the partial removal of fertiliser subsidy
has led to increase in the cost of
production, which has severely
affected the small and marginal
farmers. This sector has been
experiencing a number of policy
changes such as reduction in import
duties on agricultural products, low
minimum support price and lifting of
quantitative restrictions on the imports
of agricultural products. These have
adversely affected Indian farmers as
they now have to face increased
international competition.
Moreover, because of export-
oriented policy strategies in agriculture,
there has been a shift from production
for the domestic market towards
production for the export market
focusing on cash crops in lieu of
production of food grains. This puts
pressure on prices of food grains.
Reforms in Industry: Industrial
growth has also recorded a slowdown.
This is because of decreasing demand
of industrial products due to
various reasons such as cheaper
imports, inadequate investment in
infrastructure etc. In a globalised
world, developing countries are
compelled to open up their economies
to greater flow of goods and capital
from developed countries and
rendering their industries vulnerable
to imported goods. Cheaper imports
have, thus, replaced the demand
for domestic goods. Domestic
manufacturers are facing competition
from imports. The infrastructure
facilities, including power supply,
have remained inadequate due to lack
of investment. Globalisation is, thus,
often seen as creating conditions for
the free movement of goods and
services from foreign countries that
adversely affect the local industries
and employment opportunities in
developing countries.
Moreover, a developing country
like India still does not have the access
to developed countries’ markets
because of high non-tariff barriers. For
example, although all quota
restrictions on exports of textiles and
clothing have been removed in India,
USA has not removed their quota
restriction on import of textiles from
India and China.
Disinvestment: Every year, the
government fixes a target for
disinvestment of PSEs. For instance,
in 1991-92, it was targeted to mobilise
Rs 2500 crore through disinvestment.
The government was able to mobilise
` 3,040 crore more than the target.
In 2017–18, the target was about
` 1,00,000 crore, and the achievement
was about ` 1,00,057 crore. Critics
point out that the assets of PSEs have
been undervalued and sold to the
private sector. This means that there
has been a substantial loss to the
government and the outright sale of
public assets! Moreover, the proceeds
from disinvestment are used to offset
the shortage of government revenues
rather than using it for
the
development of PSEs and building
social infrastructure in the country.
Do you think selling a part of the
properties of government companies
is the best way to improve their
efficiency?
Reforms and Fiscal Policies:
Economic reforms have placed limits
on the growth of public expenditure,
especially in social sectors. The tax
reductions in the reform period, aimed
at yielding larger revenue and curb tax
evasion, have not resulted in increase
in tax revenue for the government. Also,
the reform policies, involving tariff
reduction, have curtailed the scope for
raising revenue through custom duties.
In order to attract foreign investment,
tax incentives are provided to foreign
investors which further reduced the
scope for raising tax revenues. This has
a negative impact on developmental and
welfare expenditures.


3.7 CONCLUSION
The process of globalisation through
liberalisation and privatisation policies
has produced positive, as well as,
negative results both for India and
other countries. Some scholars argue
that globalisation should be seen as
an opportunity in terms of greater
access to global markets, high
technology and increased possibility of
large industries of developing
countries to become important
players in the international arena.
On the contrary, the critics argue
that globalisation is a strategy of the
developed countries to expand their
markets in other countries. According
to them, it has compromised the
welfare and identity of people
belonging to poor countries. It has
further been pointed out that market-
driven globalisation has widened the
economic disparities among nations
and people.
Viewed from the Indian context,
some studies have stated that the
crisis that erupted in the early 1990s
was basically an outcome of the deep-
rooted inequalities in Indian society
and the economic reform policies
initiated as a response to the crisis
by the government, with externally
advised policy package, further
aggravated the inequalities. Further,
it has increased the income and
quality of consumption of only high-
income groups and the growth has
been concentrated only in
some select areas in the services sector
such as telecommunication,
information technology, finance,
entertainment, travel and hospitality
services, real estate and trade,
rather than vital sectors such as
agriculture and industry which
provide livelihoods to millions of
people in the country.


Box 3.3: Siricilla Tragedy!
Power sector reforms in many Indian states led to do away with the supply of
electricity at subsidised rates and steep rise in power tariff. This has affected
workers engaged in small industries. Powerloom textile industry in Andhra
Pradesh is an example. Since the wages of the powerloom workers are linked
to the production of cloth, power cut means cut in wages of weavers, who
were already suffering from hike in tariff. A few years ago, this led to a crisis
in the livelihood of the weavers and 50 powerloom workers committed suicide
in a small town called ‘Siricilla’ in Andhra Pradesh.
Ø Do you think the power tariff should not be raised?
Ø What would be your suggestions to revive small industries affected by
reforms?



Recap
Ø The economy was facing problems of declining foreign exchange, growing
imports without matching rise in exports and high inflation. India changed
its economic policies in 1991 due to a financial crisis and pressure from
international organisations like the World Bank and IMF.
Ø In the domestic economy, major reforms were undertaken in the industrial
and financial sectors. Major external sector reforms included foreign
exchange deregulations and import liberalisation.
Ø With a view to improving the performance of the public sector, there was a
consensus on reducing its role and opening it up to the private sector. This
was done through disinvestment and liberalisation measures.
Ø Globalisation is the outcome of the policies of liberalisation and privatisation.
It means an integration of the economy of the country with the world economy.
Ø Outsourcing is emerging as a major activity in industrial and service
sectors.
Ø The objective of the WTO is to establish a rule based trade regime to ensure
optimum utilisation of world resources.
Ø During the reforms, growth of agriculture and industry has gone down but
the service sector has registered growth.
Ø Reforms have not benefited the agriculture sector. There has also been a
decline in public investment in this sector.
Ø Industrial sector growth has slowed down due to availability of cheaper
imports and lower investment.
