6.1 INTRODUCTION
People do a variety of work. Some
work on farms, in factories, banks,
shops
and
many
other
workplaces; yet a few others work
at home. Work at home includes
not only traditional work like
weaving, lace making or variety of
handicrafts but also modern jobs
like programming work in the IT
industry. Earlier factory work
meant working in factories located
in cities whereas now technology
has enabled people to produce
those factory-based goods at
home in villages. During Covid-19
pandemic in 2020–21, millions of
workers delivered their products and
services through work-from-home.
Why do people work? Work plays
an important role in our lives as
individuals and as members of society.
People work for ‘earning’ a living. Some
people get, or have, money by inheriting
it, not working for it. This does not
completely satisfy anybody. Being
employed in work gives us a sense of
self-worth and enables us to relate
ourselves meaningfully with others.
Every working person is actively
contributing to national income and
hence, the development of the country
by engaging in various economic
activities — that is the real meaning of
‘earning’ a living. We do not work only
for ourselves; we also have a sense of
accomplishment when we work to meet
the requirements of those who are
dependent on us. Having recognised
the importance of work, Mahatma
Gandhi insisted upon education and
training through a variety of works
including craft.
Studying about working people
gives us insights into the quality and
nature of employment in a country and
helps in understanding and planning
our human resources. It helps us to
analyse the contribution made by
different industries and sectors towards
national income. It also helps us to
address many social issues such as
exploitation of marginalised sections of
the society, child labour, etc.
6.2 WORKERS
AND EMPLOYMENT
What is employment? Who is a worker?
When a farmer works on fields, he or
she produces food grains and raw
materials for industries. Cotton
becomes cloth in textile mills and in
powerlooms. Lorries transport goods
from one place to another. We know
that the total money value of all such
final goods and services produced in a
country in a year is called its gross
domestic product for that year. When
we also consider what we pay for our
imports and get from our exports we
find that there is a net earning for the
country which may be positive (if we
have exported more in value terms than
imported) or negative (if imports
exceeded exports in value terms) or zero
(if exports and imports were of the same
value). When we add this earning (plus
or minus) from foreign transactions,
what we get is called the country’s gross
national product for that year.
Those activities which contribute to
the gross national product are called
economic activities. All those who are
engaged in economic activities, in
whatever capacity — high or low, are
workers. Even if some of them
temporarily abstain from work due to
illness, injury or other physical
disability, bad weather, festivals, social
or religious functions, they are also
workers. Workers also include all those
who help the main workers in these
activities. We generally think of only
those who are paid by an employer for
their work as workers. This is not so.
Those who are self-employed are also
workers.
The nature of employment in India
is multifaceted. Some get employment
throughout the year; some others get
employed for only a few months in a
year. Many workers do not get fair
wages for their work. While estimating
the number of workers, all those who
are engaged in economic activities are
included as employed. You might be
interested in knowing the number of
people actively engaged in various
economic activities. During 2017-18,
India had about a 471 million strong
workforce. Since majority of our people
reside in rural areas, the proportion of
workforce residing there is higher. The

rural workers constitute about two-
thirds of this 471 million. Men form
the majority of workforce in India.
About 77 per cent of the workers are
men and the rest are women (men and
women include child labourers in
respective sexes). Women workers
account for one-fourth of the rural
workforce whereas in urban areas,
they are just one-fifth of the
workforce. Women carry out works
like cooking, fetching water and
fuelwood and participate in farm
labour. They are not paid wages in
cash or in the form of grains; at times
they are not paid at all. For this
reason, these women are not
categorised as workers. Economists
argue that these women should also
be called workers. What do you think?
6.3 P ARTICIPATION OF P EOPLE IN
E MPLOYMENT
Worker-population ratio is an indicator
which is used for analysing the
employment situation in the country.
This ratio is useful in knowing the
proportion of population that is
actively contributing to the production
of goods and services of a country. If
the ratio is higher, it means that the
engagement of people is greater; if the
ratio for a country is medium, or low,
it means that a very high proportion
of its population is not involved
directly in economic activities.
You might have already studied,
in lower classes, the meaning of the
term ‘population’. Population is
defined as the total number of people
who reside in a particular locality at
a particular point of time. If you want
to know the worker-population ratio
for India, divide the total number of
workers in India by the population in
India and multiply it by 100, you will
get the worker-population ratio for
India.
If you look at Table 6.1, it shows
the different levels of participation of
people in economic activities. For
every 100 persons, about 35 (by
rounding off 34.7) are workers in
India. In urban areas, the proportion
is about 34, whereas in rural India, the
ratio is about 35. Why is there such a
difference? People in rural areas have
limited resources to earn a higher
income and participate more in the
employment market. Many do not go
to schools, colleges and other training
institutions. Even if some go, they
discontinue in the middle to join the
workforce; whereas, in urban areas, a
considerable section is able to study in
various educational institutions. Urban
people have a variety of employment
opportunities. They look for the
appropriate job to suit their
qualifications and skills. In rural areas,
people cannot stay at home as their
economic condition may not allow them
to do so.

Compared to females, more males
are found to be working. The
differences in participation rates is very
large in urban areas: for every 100
urban females, only about 14 are 
engaged in some economic activities.
In rural areas, for every 100 rural
women about 18 participate in the
employment market. Why are women
in general, and urban women, in
particular, not working? It is
common to find that where men are
able to earn high incomes, families
discourage female members from 
taking up jobs.
Going back to what has already been 
mentioned above, many household 
activities done by women are not 
recognised as productive work.
This narrow definitionof work 
leads to non-recognition of women’s
work and, therefore, to the
underestimation of the number of
women workers in the country. Think
of the women actively engaged in many
activities within the house and at
family farms who are not paid for such
work. As they certainly contribute to
the maintenance of the household and
farms, do you think that their number
should be added to the number of
women workers?


6.4 SELF-EMPLOYED AND HIRED WORKERS
Does the worker-population ratio say 
anything about wokers' status in
society or about the working 
conditions? By knowing the status 
with which a worker is placed in an
enterprise, it may be possible to know
one dimension - quality of
employment in a country. It also
enables us to know the attachment a
worker has with his or her job and
the authority she or he has over the 
enterprise and over other co-workers.
Let is take three workers form the 
construction industry - a cement
shop owner, a construction worker and
a civil engineer of a construction
company. Since the status of each one
of them is different form another, they
are also called differently. Workers
who own and operate an enterprose to 
earn their livelihood are known as 
self-employed. Thus the cement shop 
owner is self-employed. About 52
percent workforce in India belongs 
to this category. The construction 
workers are known as casual wage labourers;
they account for about 25 percent of India's
workforce. Such labourers are casually
engaged in others' farms and, in return,
get a remuneration for the work done.
Workers like the civil engineer working
inthe construction cpmany acconut for 23 
percent of India's workforce. When  a
worker is engaged by someone or an 
enterprise and paid his or her wages
on a regular basis, they are known as
regular salaried employees (see table 6.3).
Look at Chart 6.1 you will notice that 
self-emloyment is a mojor source of 
livelihood for both men and women as
this category accounts for more than
50 percent of the workforce. Casual wage
work is the second major source for both 
men and women,a little more so for the
latter (24-27 per cent). When it comes to
regular salaried employment, both women and
men are found to be so engaged in
greater proportion. Men form 23 per
cent whereas women form 21 per cent.
The gap between men and women is
very less.
When we compare the distribution
of workforce in rural and urban areas
in Chart 6.2 you will notice that the self-
employed and casual wage labourers
are found more in rural areas than in
urban areas. In the latter, both self-
employment and regular wage salaried
jobs are greater. In the former, since
majority of those depending on farming
own plots of land and cultivate
independently, the share of self-
employed is greater.
The nature of work in urban areas
is different. Obviously everyone cannot
run factories, shops and offices of
various types. Moreover enterprises in
urban areas require workers on a
regular basis.


6.5 EMPLOYMENT IN FIRMS, FACTORIES AND OFFICES
In the course of
economic development
of a country, labour
flows from agriculture
and other related
activities to industry and
services. In this process,
workers migrate from
rural to urban areas.
Eventually, at a much
later stage, the industrial sector begins
to lose its share of total employment 
as the service sector enters a period of
rapid expansion. This shift can be 
understood by looking at the 
distribution of workers by industry.
Generally, we divide all economic
activities into eight different industrial
divisions. They are (i) Agriculture (ii)
Mining and Quarrying (iii)
Manufacturing (iv) Electricity, Gas and
Water Supply (v) Construction (vi)
Trade (vii) Transport and Storage and
(viii) Services. For simplicity, all the
working persons engaged in these 
divisions can be clubbed into three
major sectors viz., (a) primary sectors
which includes (i) and (ii), (b) secondary
sector which includes (iii), (iv) and (v)
and (c) service sectors which includes
divisions (vi), (vii) and (viii). Table 6.2
shows the distribution of working 
persons in different industries during
the year 2017-18.
Primanry sector is the main source 
of employment for majority of workers.


in India. Secondary sector provides
employment to only about 24 per cent
of workforce. About 31 per cent of
workers are in the service sector. Table
6.2 also shows that about 60 per cent
of the workforce in rural India depends
on agriculture, forestry and fishing.
About 20 per cent of rural workers are
working in manufacturing industries,
construction and other industrial
activities. Service sector provides
employment to about 20 per cent of
rural workers. Agriculture is not a
major source of employment in urban
areas where people are mainly engaged
in the service sector. About 60 per cent
of urban workers are in the service
sector. The secondary sector gives
employment to about one-third of
urban workforce.
Though both men and women
workers are concentrated in the
primary sector, women workers’
concentration is very high there. About
57 per cent of the female workforce
is employed in the primary sector
whereas less than half of males work
in that sector. Men get opportunities
in both secondary and service sectors.
6.6
GROWTH AND CHANGING
STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENT
In Chapters 2 and 3, you might have
studied about the planning strategies
in detail. Here we will look at two
developmental indicators — growth of
employment and GDP. Nearly seventy
years of planned development have
been aimed at expansion of the
economy through increase in national
output and employment.
During the period 1950–2010,
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of India
grew positively and was higher than
the employment growth. However,
there was always fluctuation in the
growth of GDP. During this period,
employment grew at the rate of not
more than 2 per cent.
Chart 6.3 also points at another
disheartening development in the late
1990s: employment growth started
declining and reached the level of
growth that India had in the early
stages of planning. During these
years, we also find a widening gap
between the growth of GDP and
employment. This means that in the
Indian economy, without generating
employment, we have been able to
produce more goods and services.
Scholars refer to this phenomenon as
jobless growth.
So far we have seen how employment
has grown in comparison to GDP. Now it
is necessary to know how the growth
patter n of employment and GDP
affected different sections of workforce.
Fr om this we will also be able to
understand what types of employment
are generated in our country.
Let us look at two indicators that
we have seen in the preceding sections
— employment of people in various
industries and their status. We know
that India is an agrarian nation; a
major section of population lives in
rural areas and is dependent on
agriculture as their main livelihood.
Developmental strategies in many
countries, including India, have aimed
at reducing the proportion of people
depending on agriculture.
Distribution of workforce by
industrial sectors shows substantial
shift from farm work to non-farm work
(see Table 6.3). In 1972-73, about 74
per cent of workforce was engaged in
primary sector and in 2011-12, this
proportion has declined to about
50 per cent. Secondary and service
sectors are showing promising future
for the Indian workforce. You may
notice that the shares of these sectors
have increased from 11 to 24 per cent
and 15 to 27 per cent, respectively.
The distribution of workforce in
different status indicates that over the
last five decades (1972-2018), people
have moved from self-employment and
regular salaried employment to casual
wage work. Yet self-employment
continues to be the major employment
provider. Look at the last column of
table 6.3. How do you understand the
stagnation of secondary sector and
moderate rise in self-employement
during 2011-18? Discuss in the class.
Scholars call the process of moving
from self-employment and regular
salaried employment to casual wage
work noticed during 1972-94 as
casualisation of workforce. This
makes the workers highly vulnerable.
How? Look at the case study of
Ahmedabad in the preceding section.
In the mean time you also notice
in 2017-18 a moderate rise in the
share of regular salaried employees.
How do you explain this phenomenon?

6.7 I N F O R M A L I S A T I O N O F I N D I A N
WORKFORCE
In the previous section we have found
that the proportion of hired work jobs -
working for others has been increasing.
One of the objectives of development
planning in India, since India’s
independence, has been to provide
decent livelihood to its people. It has
been envisaged that the industrialisation
strategy would bring surplus workers
from agriculture to industry with better
standard of living as in developed
countries. We have seen in the preceding
section, that even after 70 years of
planned development, more than half
of the Indian workforce depends on
farming as the major source of livelihood.
Economists argue that, over the
years, the quality of employment has
been deteriorating. Even after working for
more than 10-20 years, why do some
workers not get maternity benefit,
provident fund, gratuity and pension?
Why does a person working in the
private sector get a lower salary as
compared to another person doing the
same work but in the public sector?
You may find that a small section of
Indian workforce is getting regular
income. The government, through its
labour laws, enable them to protect their
rights in various ways. This section of the
workforce forms trade unions, bargains
with employers for better wages and other
social security measures. Who are they?
To know this we classify workforce into
two categories: workers in formal and
informal sectors, which are also referred
to as organised and unorganised
sectors. All the public sector
establishments and those private
sector establishments which employ
10 hired workers or more are called
formal sector establishments and those
who work in such establishments are
formal sector workers. All other
enterprises and workers working in those
enterprises form the informal sector.
Thus, informal sector includes millions
of farmers, agricultural labourers,
owners of small enterprises and people
working in those enterprises as also the
self-employed who do not have any
hired workers. It also includes all non-
farm casual wage labourers who work
for more than one employer such as
construction workers and headload
workers. You may note that this is one
of the ways of classifying workers.
There could be other ways of
classification as well. Discuss the
possible ways in the class.
Those who are working in the formal
sector enjoy social security benefits.
They earn more than those in the
informal sector. Developmental
planninig envisaged that as the economy
grows, more and more workers would
become fromal sector worker and the
informal sector would dwindle. But
what has happened in India? Look at the 
following chart which gives the distribution 
of workforce in formal and informal sectors.
We learnt that in 2011-12 there were
about 473 million workers in India.
There were about 30 million workers 
in the formal sector. Can you estimate
the percentage of people employed in 
the formal sectors in the country?
About only six percent (30/473*100)!
Thus, the rest 94 percent are in the
informal sector. In 2011-12, the year
for which gender wise data on
formal-informal sector employment is
available (Chart 6.4), about 20 percent
of formal sector and 30 percent of
informal sector workers are women
Since the late 1970s, many
developing countries, including India,
started paying attention to enterprises
and workers in the informal sector
as employment in the formal sector
is not gr owing. Workers and
enterprises in the informal sector do not
get regular income; they do not have
any protection or regulation from the
government. Workers are dismissed
without
any
compensation.
Technology used in the informal sector
enterprises is outdated; they also do
not maintain any accounts. Workers
of this sector live in slums and are
squatters. Of late, owing to the efforts
of the International Labour Organisation
(ILO), the Indian government has
initiated the modernisation of informal
sector enterprises and provision of
social security measures to informal
sector workers.

Box 6.1: Formal Sector Employment
The information relating to employment in the formal sector is collected by the Union
Ministry of Labour through employment exchanges located in different parts of the country.
Do you know who is the major employer in the formal sector in India? In 2012, out of
about 30 million formal sector workers, about 18 million workers were employed by the
public sector. Here also men form the majority, as women constitute only about
one-sixth of the formal sector workforce. Economists point out that the reform process
initiated in the early 1990s resulted in a decline in the number of workers employed in
the formal sector. What do you think?



Box 6.2: Informalisation in Ahmedabad
Ahmedabad is a prosperous city with its wealth based on the produce of more
than 60 textile mills with a labour force of 1,50,000 workers employed in them.
These workers had, over the course of the century, acquired a certain degree
of income security. They had
secure jobs with a living
wage; they were covered by
social security schemes
protecting their health and
old age. They had a strong
trade union which not only
represented
them
in
disputes but also ran
activities for the welfare of
workers and their families.
In the early 1980s, textile
mills all over the country
began to close down. In some
places, such as Mumbai,
the mills closed rapidly. In
Ahmedabad, the process of
closure was long drawn out
and spread over 10 years.
Over this period, approximately over 80,000 permanent workers and over 50,000
non-permanent workers lost their jobs and were driven to the informal sector.
The city experienced an economic recession and public disturbances, especially
communal riots. A whole class of workers was thrown back from the middle
class into the informal sector, into poverty. There was widespread alcoholism
and suicides, children were withdrawn from school and sent to work.


6.8 UNEMPLOYMENT
You might have seen
people looking for jobs in
newspapers. Some look
for a job through friends
and relatives. In many
cities, you might find
people standing in some
select areas looking for
people to employ them
for that day’s work. Some
go to factories and offices
and give their bio-data
and ask whether there is
any vacancy in their factory or office.
Many in the rural areas do not go out
and ask for a job but stay home when
there is no work. Some go to
employment exchanges and register
themselves for vacancies notified through
employment exchanges. The National
Statistical Office (Previously it was known
as National Sample Survey Organisation)
defines unemployment as a situation in
which all those who, owing to lack of
work, are not working but either seek
work through employment exchanges,
intermediaries, friends or relatives or by
making applications to prospective
employers or express their willingness
or availability fro work under the
prevailing condition of work and
remunerations. There are a variety of
ways by which an unemployed person
is identified. Economists define
unemployed person as ine who is not
able to get employment of even one hour
in half a day.
There are three sources of data on
unemployment : Reports of Census of
India, National Statistical Office's
Reports of Employment and
Unemployment Situation, Annual
Reports of Periodic Labour Force
Survey, and Directorate General of
Employment and Training
data of Registration with
Employment Exchanges.
Though they provide
different estimates of
unemployment, they do
provide us with the
attributes of the
unemployed and the
variety of unemployment
prevailing in our country.
Do we have different types
of unemployment in our
economy? The situation
described in the first
paragraph of this section is called open
unemployment. Economists call 
unemployment prevailing in Indian farms
as disguised unemployment. What is
diguised unemployment? Suppose a
farmer has four acres of land and he
actually need only two workers and 
himself to carry out various operations
on his farm in a year, but if he employs
five workers and his family members
such as his wife and children, this
situation is known as disguised
unemployment. One study conducted in
the late 1950s showed about one-third
of agriculture workers in India as
disguisedly unemployed.
You may have noticed that many
peolpe migrate to an urban area, pick
up a job and stay there for some time,
but come back to their home villages
as soon as the rainy season begins.
Why do they do so? This is because
work in agriculture is seasonal; there
are no employment opportunities in the
village for all months in the year. When
there is no work to do on farms, people
go to urban areas and look for jobs.
This kind of unemployment is known
as seasonal unemployment. This is also
a common form of unemployment
prevailing in India.
Though we have witnessed slow
growth of employment, have you seen
people being unemployed over a very
long time? Scholars say that in India,
people connot remain completely
unemployed for very long because their
desperate economic condition would
not allow them to be so. You will rather 
find them being forced to accept
jobs that nobody else would do,
unpleasant or even dangerous jobs in
unclean, or unhealthy surroundings.
The Central and State governments
take initiatives and generate
employment to facilitae a decent living
for low income families through various
measures. These will be discussed in 
the following section.


6.9 GOVERNMENT AND EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
You may recall about
the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee
Act 2005. It promises 100 days
of guaranteed wage employment
to all rural households who
volunteer to do unskilled
manual work. The scheme
based on this Act is one of the
many measures the
government has implemented
to generate employment for
those who are in need of jobs
in rural areas.
Since Independence, the
Union and State governments
have played an important role in
generating employment or creating
opportunities for employment
generation. Their efforts can be
broadly categorised into two - direct
and indirect. In the first category, as
you have seen in the preceding section,
the government employs people in
various departments for administrative
purposes. It also runs industries,
hotels and transport companies, and
hence, provides employment directly
to workers. When the output
of goods and services from 
government enterprises increases, then
private enterprises which receive raw
materials from government enterprises
will also raise their output and hence
increase the number of employment
opportunities in the economy. For
example, when a government owned
steel company increases its output, it
will result in direct increase in
employment in that government
company. Simultaneously, private
companies, which purchase steel from
it, will also increase their output and
thus employment. This is the indirect
generation of employment
opportunities by the government
initiatives in the economy.
Many programmes that the
governments implement, aimed at
alleviating poverty, are through
employment generation. They are
also known as employment
generation programmes. All these
programmes aim at providing not
only employment but also services in
areas such as primary health,
primary education, rural drinking
water, nutrition, assistance for people
to buy income and employment
generating assets, development of
community assets by generating
wage employment, construction of
houses and sanitation, assistance for
constructing houses, laying of rural
roads, development of wastelands/
degraded lands.


6.10 CONCLUSION
There has been a change in the
structure of workforce in India. Newly
emerging jobs are found mostly in the
service sector. The expansion of the
service sector and the advent of high
technology now frequently permit a
highly competitive existence for efficient
small scale and often individual
enterprises or specialist workers side by
side with the multinationals.
Outsourcing of work is becoming a
common practice. It means that a
big firm finds it profitable to close
down some of its specialist
departments (for example, legal or
computer programming or customer
service sections) and hand over a large
number of small piecemeal jobs to very
small enterprises or specialist
individuals, sometimes situated even in
other countries. The traditional notion
of the modern factory or office, as a
result, has been altered in such
a manner that for many the home
is becoming the workplace. All of
this change has not gone in favour
of the individual worker. The nature
of employment has become more
informal with only limited availability
of social security measures to the
workers.
In the last few decades, there
has been rapid growth in the gross
domestic product, but without
simultaneous increase in employment
opportunities. This has forced the
government to take up initiatives in
generating employment opportunities
particularly in the rural areas.


Recap
Ø All those persons who are engaged in various economic activities and
hence contribute to gross national product are workers.
Ø About two-fifth of the total population in the country is engaged in various
economic activities.
Ø Men particularly rural men, form the major section of workforce in India.
Ø Majority of workers in India are self-employed. Casual wage labourers
and regular salaried employees together account for less than half the
proportion of India’s workforce.
Ø About three-fifth of India’s workforce depends on agriculture and other
allied activities as the major source of livelihood.
Ø In recent years, the growth of employment has decelerated.
Ø During post-reform period, India has been witness to employment
opportunities in the service sector. These new jobs are found mostly in
the informal sector and the nature of jobs is also mostly casual.
Ø Government is the major formal sector employer in the country.
Ø Disguised unemployment is a common form of unemployment in rural
India.
Ø There has been a change in the structure of the workforce in India.
Ø Through various schemes and policies, the government takes initiatives
to generate employment directly and indirectly.
