7.1 INTRODUCTION
In the earlier chapters we have
discussed the main economic issues
faced by the Indian economy. The
economic development that we have
achieved so far has come at a very heavy
price — at the cost of environmental
quality. As we step into an era of
globalisation that promises higher
economic growth, we have to bear in
mind the adverse consequences of the
past developmental path on our
environment and consciously choose a
path of sustainable development. To
understand the unsustainable path of
development that we have taken and
the challenges of sustainable
development, we have to first
understand the significance and
contribution of environment to
economic development. With this in
mind, this chapter is divided into three
sections. The first part deals with the
functions and role of environment. The
second section discusses the state of
India’s environment and the third
section deals with steps and strategies
to achieve sustainable development.
7.2 ENVIRONMENT — DEFINITION AND
FUNCTIONS
Environment is defined as the total
planetary inheritance and the totality
of all resources. It includes all the biotic
and abiotic factors that influence each
other. While all living elements — the
birds, animals and plants, forests,
fisheries etc. — are biotic elements,
abiotic elements include air, water, land
etc. Rocks and sunlight are examples
of abiotic elements of the environment.
A study of the environment then calls
for a study of the inter-relationship
between these biotic and abiotic
components of the environment.
Functions of the Environment: The
environment performs four vital
functions (i) it supplies resources:
resources here include both renewable
and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are those which
can be used without the possibility of
the resource becoming depleted or
exhausted. That is, a continuous
supply of the resource remains
available. Examples of renewable
resources are the trees in the forests and
the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable
resources, on the other hand, are those
which get exhausted with extraction
and use, for example, fossil fuel (ii) it
assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by
providing genetic and bio diversity and
(iv) it also provides aesthetic services
like scenery etc.
The environment is able to perform
these functions without any interruption
as long as the demand on these
functions is within its carrying
capacity. This implies that the resource
extraction is not above the rate of
regeneration of the resource and the
wastes generated are within the
assimilating capacity of the
environment. When this is not so, the
environment fails to perform its third
and vital function of life sustenance and
this results in an
environmental crisis. This
is the situation today
all over the world. The
rising population of the
developing countries and
the affluent consumption
and production standards
of the developed world have
placed a huge stress on the
environment in terms of its
first two functions. Many
resources have become
extinct and the wastes
generated are beyond the
absorptive capacity of the
environment. Absorptive
capacity means the ability
of the environment to
absorb degradation. The result — we
are today at the threshold of
environmental crisis. The past
development has polluted and dried up
rivers and other aquifers making water
an economic good. Besides, the
intensive and extensive extraction of
both renewable and non-renewable
resources has exhausted some of these
vital resources and we are compelled
to spend huge amounts on technology
and research to explore new resources.
Added to these are the health costs of
degraded environmental quality —
decline in air and water quality (seventy
per cent of water in India is polluted)
have resulted in increased incidence of
respiratory and water-borne diseases.
Hence the expenditure on health is also
rising. To make matters worse, global
environmental issues such as global
warming and ozone depletion also
contribute to increased financial
commitments for the government.
Thus, it is clear that the opportunity
costs of negative environmental
impacts are high.
The biggest question that arises is:
are environmental problems new to this
century? If so, why? The answer to this
question requires some elaboration. In
the early days when civilisation just
began, or before this phenomenal
increase in population, and before
countries took to industrialisation, the
demand for environmental resources
and services was much less than their
supply. This meant that pollution was
within the absorptive capacity of the
environment and the rate of resource
extraction was less than the rate of
regeneration of these resources. Hence
environmental problems did not arise.
But with population explosion and with
the advent of industrial revolution
to meet the growing needs of the
expanding population, things
changed. The result was that the
demand for resources for both
production and consumption
went beyond the rate of
regeneration of the resources; the
pressure on the absorptive
capacity of the environment
increased tremendously — this
trend continues even today. Thus
what has happened is a reversal
of supply-demand relationship
for environmental quality — we
are now faced with increased
demand for environmental
resources and services but their
supply is limited due to overuse
and misuse. Hence
the environmental
issues of waste
generation and
pollution
have
become critical
today.


Box 7.1: Global Warming
Global warming is a gradual increase in the average temperature of the earth’s
lower atmosphere as a result of the increase in greenhouse gases since the
Industrial Revolution. Much of the recent observed and projected global
warming is human-induced. It is caused by man-made increases in carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases through the burning of fossil fuels and
deforestation. Adding carbon dioxide, methane and such other gases (that
have the potential to absorb heat) to the atmosphere with no other changes
will make our planet’s surface warmer. The atmospheric concentrations of
carbon dioxide and CH4 have increased by 31 per cent and 149 per cent
respectively above pre-industrial levels since 1750. During the past century,
the atmospheric temperature has risen by 1.1°F (0.6°C) and sea level has
risen several inches. Some of the longer-term results of global warming are
melting of polar ice with a resulting rise in sea level and coastal flooding;
disruption of drinking water supplies dependent on snow melts; extinction of
species as ecological niches disappear; more frequent tropical storms; and an
increased incidence of tropical diseases.
Among factors that may be contributing to global warming are the burning
of coal and petroleum products (sources of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, ozone); deforestation, which increases the amount of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere; methane gas released in animal waste; and increased cattle
production, which contributes to deforestation, methane production, and use
of fossil fuels. A UN Conference on Climate Change, held in Kyoto, Japan, in
1997, resulted in an international agreement to fight global warming which
called for reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases by industrialised nations.



Box 7.2: Ozone Depletion
Ozone depletion refers to the phenomenon of reductions in the amount of ozone
in the stratosphere. The problem of ozone depletion is caused by high levels
of chlorine and bromine compounds in the stratosphere. The origins of these
compounds are chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), used as cooling substances in air-
conditioners and refrigerators, or as aerosol propellants, and
bromofluorocarbons (halons), used in fire extinguishers. As a result of depletion
of the ozone layer, more ultraviolet (UV) radiation comes to Earth and causes
damage to living organisms. UV radiation seems responsible for skin cancer
in humans; it also lowers production of phytoplankton and thus affects other
aquatic organisms. It can also influence the growth of terrestrial plants. A
reduction of approximately 5 per cent in the ozone layer was detected from
1979 to 1990. Since the ozone layer prevents most harmful wavelengths of
ultraviolet light from passing through the Earth’s atmosphere, observed and
projected decreases in ozone have generated worldwide concern. This led to
the adoption of the Montreal Protocol banning the use of chlorofluorocarbon
(CFC) compounds, as well as other ozone depleting chemicals such as carbon
tetrachloride, trichloroethane (also known as methyl chloroform), and bromine
compounds known as halons.

7.3 STATE OF INDIA’S ENVIRONMENT
India has abundant natural resources in
terms of rich quality of soil, hundreds of
rivers and tributaries, lush green forests,
plenty of mineral 
deposits beneath the land surface, vast
stretch of the Indian Ocean, ranges of
mountains, etc. The black soil of the
Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable
for cultivation of cotton, leading to
concentration of textile industries in this
region. The Indo-Gangetic plains —
spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay
of Bengal — are one of the most fertile,
intensively cultivated and densely
populated regions in the world. India’s
forests, though unevenly distributed,
provide green cover for a majority of its
population and natural cover for its
wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal
and natural gas are found in the
country. India accounts for nearly
8 per cent of the world’s total iron-ore
reserves. Bauxite, copper, chromate,
diamonds, gold, lead, lignite,
manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also
available in different parts of the
country. However, the developmental
activities in India have resulted in
pressure on its finite natural
resources, besides creating impacts on
human health and well-being. The
threat to India’s environment poses a
dichotomy —threat of poverty-induced
environmental degradation and, at the
same time, threat of pollution from
affluence and a rapidly growing
industrial sector. Air pollution,
water contamination, soil erosion,
deforestation and wildlife extinction
are some of the most pressing
environmental concerns of India. The
priority issues identified are (i) land
degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air
pollution with special reference to
vehicular pollution in urban cities (iv)
management of fresh water and (v) solid
waste management. Land in India
suffers from varying degrees and types
of degradation stemming mainly from
unstable use and inappropriate
management practices.
Some of the factors responsible
for land degradation are (i) loss
of vegetation occuring due to
deforestation (ii) unsustainable fuel
wood and fodder extraction (iii) shifting
cultivation (iv) encroachment into forest
lands (v) forest fires and over grazing
(vi) non-adoption of adequate soil
conservation measures (vii) improper
crop rotation (viii) indiscriminate use of
agro-chemicals such as fertilisers and
pesticides (ix) improper planning and
management of irrigation systems
(x) extraction of ground water in
excess of the recharge capacity (xi)
open access resource and (xii) poverty
of the agriculture-dependent people.
India supports approximately 17
per cent of the world’s human and 20
per cent of livestock population on a
mere 2.5 per cent of the world’s
geographical area. The high density
of population and livestock and

the competing uses of land for
forestry, agriculture, pastures, human
settlements and industries exert an
enormous pressure on the country’s
finite land resources.
The per capita forest land in the
country is only 0.06 hectare against
the requirement of 0.47 hectare to meet
basic needs, resulting in an excess
felling of about 15 million cubic metre
forests over the permissible limit.
Estimates of soil erosion show that
soil is being eroded at a rate of 5.3
billion tonnes a year for the entire
country as a result of which the
country loses 0.8 million tonnes of
nitrogen, 1.8 million tonnes of
phosphorus and 26.3 million tonnes
of potassium every year. According to
the Government of India, the quantity
of nutrients lost due to erosion each
year ranges from 5.8 to 8.4 million
tonnes.

In India, air pollution is widespread
in urban areas where vehicles are the
major contributors and in a few other
areas which have a high concentration
of industries and thermal power plants.
Vehicular emissions are of particular
concern since these are ground level
sources and, thus, have the maximum
impact on the general population. The
number of motor vehicles has increased
from about 3 lakh in 1951 to 30 crores
in 2019. In 2016, personal transport
vehicles (two-wheeled vehicles and cars
only) constituted about 85 per cent of
the total number of registered vehicles
thus contributing significantly to total
air pollution load.
India is one of the ten most
industrialised nations of the world.
But this status has brought with
it unwanted and unanticipated
consequences such as unplanned
urbanisation, pollution and the risk of
accidents. The CPCB (Central Pollution
Control Board) has identified seventeen
categories of industries (large
and medium scale) as significantly
polluting (See Box 7.4).
The above points highlight the
challenges to India’s environment. The
various measures adopted by the
Ministry of Environment and the
central and state pollution control
boards may not yield reward unless
we consciously adopt a path of
sustainable development. The concern
for future generations alone can make
development last forever. Development
to enhance our current living styles,
without concern for posterity, will
deplete resources and degrade
environment at a pace that is bound to
result in both environmental and
economic crisis.

Box. 7.3: Chipko or Appiko — What’s in a Name?
You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests
in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name,
‘Appiko’, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees
was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi
district, 160 men, women and children
hugged the trees and forced the
woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in
the forest over the next six weeks. Only
after the forest officials assured the
volunteers that the trees will be cut
scientifically and in accordance with the
working plan of the district, did they
leave the trees.
When commercial felling by
contractors damaged a large number of
natural forests, the idea of hugging the
trees gave the people hope and
confidence that they can protect the
forests. On that particular incident, with
the felling discontinued, the people saved
12,000 trees. Within months, this
movement spread to many adjoining
districts.
Indiscriminate felling of trees for
fuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems.
Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo
has been wiped out from that area. “Broad-leaved trees which protected the
soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed
away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weed”, says
a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and
that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are
now attacking the crops.
Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certain
rules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when
trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source
and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled.
Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries to
use forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs
10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive
the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think?


Box 7.4 : Pollution Control Boards
In order to address two major environmental concerns in India, viz. water and
air pollution, the government set up the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
in 1974. This was followed by states establishing their own state level boards
to address all the environmental concerns. They investigate, collect and
disseminate information relating to water, air and land pollution, lay down
standards for sewage/trade effluent and emissions. These boards provide
technical assistance to governments in promoting cleanliness of streams and
wells by prevention, control and abatement of water pollution, and improve
the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country.
These boards also carry out and sponsor investigation and research
relating to problems of water and air pollution and for their prevention, control
or abatement. They organise, through mass media, a comprehensive mass
awareness programme for the same. The PCBs prepare manuals, codes and
guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents.
They assess the air quality through regulation of industries. In fact, state
boards, through their district level officials, periodically inspect every industry
under their jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of treatment measures provided
to treat the effluent and gaseous emissions. It also provides background air
quality data needed for industrial siting and town planning.
The pollution control boards collect, collate and disseminate technical and
statistical data relating to water pollution. They monitor the quality of water
in 125 rivers (including the tributaries), wells, lakes, creeks, ponds, tanks,
drains and canals.
Ø Visit a nearby factory/irrigation department and collect the details of
measures that they adopt to control water and air pollution.
Ø You might be seeing advertisements in newspapers, radio and television
or billboards in your locality on awareness programmes relating to water
and air pollution. Collect a few news-clippings, pamphlets and other
information and discuss them in the classroom.



7.4 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Environment and economy are
interdependent and need each other.
Hence, development that ignores its
repercussions on the environment will
destroy the environment that sustains
life forms. What is needed is sustainable
development: development that will
allow all future generations to have a
potential average quality of life that is
at least as high as that which is being
enjoyed by the current generation. The
concept of sustainable development
was emphasised by the United Nations
Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED), which defined
it as: ‘Development that meets the need
of the present generation without
compromising the ability of the future
generation to meet their own needs’.
Read the definition again. You will
notice that the term ‘need’ and the
phrase ‘future generations’ in the
definition are the catch phrases. The
use of the concept ‘needs’ in the
definition is linked to distribution of
resources. The seminal report — Our
Common Future — that gave the above
definition explained sustainable
development as ‘meeting the basic
needs of all and extending to all the
opportunity to satisfy their aspirations
for a better life’. Meeting the needs of
all requires redistributing resources
and is hence a moral issue.
Edward Barbier defined sustainable
development as one which is directly
concerned with increasing the material
standard of living of the poor at
the grass root level — this can be
quantitatively measured in terms of
increased income, real income,
educational services, health care,
sanitation, water supply etc. In more
specific terms, sustainable development
aims at decreasing the absolute poverty
of the poor by providing lasting and
secure livelihoods that minimise
resource depletion, environmental

degradation, cultural disruption and
social instability. Sustainable
development is, in this sense, a
development that meets the basic needs
of all, particularly the poor majority, for
employment, food, energy, water,
housing, and ensures growth of
agriculture, manufacturing, power and
services to meet these needs.
The Brundtland Commission
emphasises on protecting the future
generation. This is in line with the
argument of the environmentalists who
emphasise that we have a moral
obligation to hand over the planet earth
in good order to the future generation;
that is, the present generation should
bequeath a better environment to the
future generation. At least we should
leave to the next generation a stock of
‘quality of life’ assets no less than what
we have inherited.
The present generation can
promote development that enhances
the natural and built environment in
ways that are compatible with
(i) conservation of natural assets
(ii) preservation of the regenerative
capacity of the world’s natural
ecological system (iii) avoiding the
imposition of added costs or risks on
future generations.
According to Herman Daly, a leading
environmental economist, to achieve
sustainable development, the following
needs to be done (i) limiting the human
population to a level within the carrying
capacity of the environment. The carrying
capacity of the environment is like
a‘plimsoll line’ of the ship which is its load
limit mark. In the absence of the plimsoll
line for the economy, human scale grows
beyond the carrying capacity of the earth
and deviates from sustainable
development (ii) technological progress
should be input efficient and not input
consuming (iii) renewable resources
should be extracted on a sustainable basis,
that is, rate of extraction should not exceed
rate of regeneration (iv) for non-renewable
resources rate of depletion should not
exceed the rate of creation of renewable
substitutes and (v) inefficiencies arising
from pollution should be corrected. In
2015, the UN formulated 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) intended to be
achieved by the year 2030. Collect the
details of those goals and discuss them in
the context of India.
7.5 S TRATEGIES FOR S USTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Use of Non-conventional Sources of
Energy: India, as you know, is hugely
dependent on thermal and hydro
power plants to meet its power
needs. Both of these have adverse
environmental impacts. Thermal power
plants emit large quantities of carbon
dioxide which is a green house gas. It
also produces fly ash which, if not used
properly, can cause pollution of water
bodies, land and other components of
the environment. Hydroelectric projects
inundate forests and interfere with the
natural flow of water in catchment
areas and the river basins. Wind power
and solar rays are good examples of
conventional sources of energy. In recent
years, some efforts are being taken to
tap these energy resources. Collect the
details of one such unit set up in your
area if any, and discuss in the class.

LPG, Gobar Gas in Rural Areas:
Households in rural areas generally use
wood, dung cake or other biomass as
fuel. This practice has several adverse
implications like deforestation,
reduction in green cover, wastage of
cattle dung and air pollution. To rectify
the situation, subsidised LPG is being
provided. In addition, gobar gas plants
are being provided through easy loans
and subsidy. As far as liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) is concerned, it is
a clean fuel — it reduces household
pollution to a large extent. Also, energy
wastage is minimised. For the gobar
gas plant to function, cattle dung is fed
to the plant and gas is produced which
is used as fuel while the slurry which
is left over is a very good organic
fertiliser and soil conditioner.
CNG in Urban Areas: In Delhi, the use
of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as
fuel in public transport system has
significantly lowered air pollution and
the air has become cleaner. In the last
few years many other Indian cities also
began to use CNG.
Wind Power: In areas where speed of
wind is usually high, wind mills can
provide electricity without any adverse
impact on the environment. Wind
turbines move with the wind and
electricity is generated. No doubt, the
initial cost is high. But the benefits are
such that the high cost gets easily
absorbed.

Solar Power through Photovoltaic
Cells: India is naturally endowed with
a large quantity of solar energy in the
form of sunlight. We use it in different
ways. For example, we dry our clothes,
grains, other agricultural products as
well as various items made for daily use.
We also use sunlight to warm ourselves
in winter. Plants use solar energy to
perform photosynthesis. Now, with the
help of photovoltaic cells, solar energy
can be converted into electricity. These
cells use special kind of materials to
capture solar energy and then convert
the energy into electricity. This
technology is extremely useful for remote
areas and for places where supply of
power through grid or power lines is
either not possible or proves very costly.
This technique is also totally free from
pollution. In recent years India is taking
efforts to increase the power generation
through solar. India is also leading an
International body called International
Solar Alliance (ISA).
Mini-hydel Plants: In mountainous
regions, streams can be found almost
everywhere. A large percentage of such
streams are perennial. Mini-hydel
plants use the energy of such streams
to move small turbines. The turbines
generate electricity which can be used
locally. Such power plants are more or
less environment-friendly as they do not
change the land use pattern in areas
where they are located; they generate
enough power to meet local demands.
This means that they can also do away
with the need for large scale
transmission towers and cables and
avoid transmission loss.
Traditional
Knowledge
and
Practices: Traditionally, Indian people
have been close to their environment.
They have been more a component of
the environment and not its controller.
If we look back at our agriculture
system, healthcare system, housing,
transport etc., we find that all practices
have been environment friendly. Only
recently have we drifted away from the
traditional systems and caused large
scale damage to the environment and
also our rural heritage. Now, it is time
to go back. One apt example is in
healthcare. India is very much
privileged to have about 15,000 species
of plants which have medicinal
properties. About 8,000 of these are in
regular use in various systems of
treatment including the folk tradition.
With the sudden onslaught of the
western system of treatment, we
ignored our traditional systems such
as Ayurveda, Unani, Tibetan and folk
systems. These healthcare systems are
in great demand again for treating
chronic health problems. Now a days
every cosmetic produce — hair oil,
toothpaste, body lotion, face cream and
what not — is herbal in composition.
Not only are these products environment
friendly, they are relatively free from side
effects and do not involve large-scale
industrial and chemical processing.
Biocomposting: In our quest to
increase agricultural production
during the last five decades or so, we
almost totally neglected the use of
compost and completely switched over
to chemical fertilisers. The result is that
large tracts of productive land have
been adversely affected, water bodies
including ground water system have
suffered due to chemical contamination
and demand for irrigation has been
going up year after year.
Farmers, in large numbers all over
the country, have again started using
compost made from organic wastes of
different types. In certain parts of the
country, cattle are maintained only
because they produce dung which is
an important fertiliser and soil
conditioner.
Earthworms can convert organic
matter into compost faster than the
normal composting process. This
process is now being widely used.
Indirectly, the civic authorities are
benefited too as they have to dispose
reduced quantity of waste.
Biopest Control: With the advent of
green revolution, the entire country
entered into a frenzy to use more and
more chemical pesticides for higher
yield. Soon, the adverse impacts began
to show; food products were
contaminated, soil, water bodies and
even ground water were polluted with
pesticides. Even milk, meat and fishes
were found to be contaminated.
To meet this challenge, efforts are
on to bring in better methods of pest
control. One such step is the use of
pesticides based on plant products.
Neem trees are proving to be quite
useful. Several types of pest controlling
chemicals have been isolated from neem
and these are being used. Mixed
cropping and growing different crops
in consecutive years on the same land
have also helped farmers.
In addition, awareness is spreading
about various animals and birds which
help in controlling pests. For example,
snakes are one of the prime group of
animals which prey upon rats, mice and
various other pests. Similarly, large
varieties of birds, for example, owls and
peacocks, prey upon vermin and pests.
If these are allowed to dwell around the
agricultural areas, they can clear large
varieties of pests including insects.
Lizards are also important in this
regard. We need to know their value and
save them.
Sustainable development has
become a catch phrase today. It is
‘indeed’ a paradigm shift in
development thinking. Though it has
been interpreted in a number of ways,
adherence to this path ensures lasting
development and non-declining welfare
for all.
7.6 CONCLUSION
Economic development, which aimed at
increasing the production of goods and
services to meet the needs of a rising
population, puts greater pressure on
the environment. In the initial stages
of development, the demand for
environmental resources was less than
that of supply. Now the world is
faced with increased demand for
environmental resources but their
supply is limited due to overuse and
misuse. Sustainable development aims
at promoting the kind of development
that minimises environmental problems
and meets the needs of the present
generation without compromising the
ability of the future generation to meet
their own needs.


Recap
Ø Environment performs four functions: supplies resources, assimilates
wastes, sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and provides
aesthetic services.
Ø Population explosion, affluent consumption and production have placed
a huge stress on the environment.
Ø Developmental activities in India have put immense pressure on its finite
natural resources, besides creating impact on human health and
well-being.
Ø The threat to India’s environment is of two dimensions — threat of poverty
induced environmental degradation and the threat of pollution from
affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector.
Ø Though the government, through various measures, attempts to safeguard
the environment, it is also necessary to adopt a path of sustainable
development.
Ø Sustainable development is development that meets the need of the present
generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to
meet their own needs.
Ø Promotion of natural resources, conservation, preserving regenerative
capacity of ecological system and avoiding the imposition of environmental
risks on future generations would lead to sustainable development.
