4.1 INTRODUCTION
Think of one factor that has made a
great difference in the evolution of
mankind. Perhaps it is human
capacity to store and transmit
knowledge which they have been doing
through conversation, through songs
and through elaborate lectures. But
humans soon found out that we need
a good deal of training and skill to do
things efficiently. We know that the
labour skill of an educated person is
more than that of an uneducated
person and hence the former is able
to generate more income than the latter
and his or her contribution to economic
growth is, consequently, more.
Education is sought not only as it
confers higher earning capacity on
people but also for its other highly
valued benefits: it gives one a better
social standing and pride; it enables
one to make better choices in life; it
provides knowledge to understand the
changes taking place in society; it also
stimulates innovations. Moreover,
the availability of educated labour
force facilitates adaptation of new
technologies. Economists have stressed
the need for expanding educational
opportunities in a nation as it
accelerates the development process.
4.2 WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL?
Just as a country can turn physical
resources like land into physical
capital like factories, similarly, it can
also turn human resources like
nurses, farmers, teachers, students
into human capital like engineers and
doctors. Societies need sufficient
human capital in the first place — in
the form of competent people who have
themselves been educated and trained
as professors and other professionals.
In other words, we need good human
capital to produce other human capital
(say, nurses, farmers, teachers,
doctors, engineers...). This means that
we need investment in human capital
to produce more human capital out of
human resources.
Let us understand a little more of
what human capital means by posing
the following questions :
(i) What are the sources of human
capital?
(ii) Is there any relation between
human capital and economic
growth of a country?
(iii) Is the formation of human
capital linked to people’s all-round
development or, as it is now called,
human development?
(iv) What role can the government
play in human capital formation
in India?

Box 4.1: Physical and Human Capital
Both the forms of capital formation are outcomes of conscious investment decisions.
Decision regarding investment in physical capital is taken on the basis of one’s knowledge
in this regard. The entrepreneur possesses knowledge to calculate the expected rates of
return to a range of investments and then rationally decides which one of the
investments should be made. The ownership of physical capital is the outcome of the
conscious decision of the owner — the physical capital formation is mainly an economic
and technical process. A substantial part of the human capital formation takes place
in one’s life when she/he is unable to decide whether it would maximise her/his earnings.
Children are given different types of school education and health care facilities by their
parents and the society. The peers, educators and society influence the decisions
regarding human capital investments even at the tertiary level, that is, at the college
level. Moreover, the human capital formation at this stage is dependent upon the already
formed human capital at the school level. Human capital formation is partly a social
process and partly a conscious decision of the possessor of the human capital.
You know that the owner of a physical capital, say a bus, need not be present in
the place where it is used; whereas, a bus-driver, who possesses the knowledge and
ability to drive the bus, should be present when the bus is used for transportation of
people and materials. Physical capital is tangible and can be easily sold in the market
like any other commodity. Human capital is intangible; it is endogenously built in the
body and mind of its owner. Human capital is not sold in the market; only the services
of the human capital are sold and, hence, there arises the necessity of the owner of the
human capital to be present in the place of production. The physical capital is
separable from its owner, whereas, human capital is inseparable from its owner.
The two forms of capital differ in terms of mobility across space. Physical capital is
completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Human
capital is not perfectly mobile between countries as movement is restricted by nationality
and culture. Therefore, physical capital formation can be built even through imports,
whereas human capital formation is to be done through conscious policy formulations
in consonance with the nature of the society and economy and expenditure by the
state and the individuals.
Both forms of capital depreciate with time but the nature of depreciation differs
between the two. Continuous use of machine leads to depreciation and change of
technology makes a machine obsolete. In the case of human capital, depreciation takes
place with ageing but can be reduced, to a large extent, through continuous investment
in education, health, etc. This investment also facilitates the human capital to cope
with change in technology which is not the case with physical capital.
Nature of benefits flowing from human capital are different from that of physical
capital. Human capital benefits not only the owner but also the society in general. This
is called external benefit. An educated person can effectively take part in a democratic
process and contribute to the socio-economic progress of a nation. A healthy person,
by maintaining personal hygiene and sanitation, stops the spread of contagious diseases
and epidemics. Human capital creates both private and social benefits, whereas physical
capital creates only private benefit. That is, benefits from a capital good flow to those
who pay the price for the product and services produced by it.

4.3 SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL
Investment in education is considered
as one of the main sources of human
capital. There are several other sources
as well. Investments in health, on- the-
job training, migration and information
are the other sources of human capital
formation.
Why do your parents spend
money on education? Spending on
education by individuals is similar to
spending on capital goods by
companies with the objective of
increasing future profits over a period
of time. Likewise, individuals invest
in education with the objective of
increasing their future income.
Like education, health is also
considered as an important input for
the development of a nation as much
as it is important for the development
of an individual.
Who can work better — a sick
person or a person with sound health?
A sick labourer without access to
medical facilities is compelled to
abstain from work and there is loss of
productivity. Hence, expenditure on
health is an important source of
human capital formation.
The amount of money
spent on preventive
medicine (vaccination),
curative medicine
(medical intervention
during illness), social
medicine (spread of
health literacy) and
provision of clean
drinking water and good sanitation
are the various forms of health
expenditures. Health expenditure
directly increases the supply of healthy
labour force and is, thus, a source of
human capital
formation.
Firms spend on
giving on-the-
job-training to
their workers.
This may take
different forms:
one, the workers may be trained in the
firm itself under the supervision of a
skilled worker; two, the workers may
be sent for off-campus training. In both
these cases firms incur some expenses.
Firms will, thus, insist that the workers
should work for a specific period of
time, after their on-the-job training,
during which it can recover the benefits
of the enhanced productivity owing to
the training. Expenditure regarding on-
the-job training is a source of human
capital formation as the return of such
expenditure in the form of enhanced
labour productivity is more than the
cost of it.
People migrate in search of jobs
that fetch them higher salaries than
what they may get in their native
places. Unemployment is the reason for
the rural-urban migration in India.
Technically qualified persons, like
engineers and doctors, migrate to other
countries because of higher salaries
that they may get in such countries.
Migration in both these cases involves
cost of transport, higher cost of living
in the migrated places and psychic
costs of living in a strange socio-
cultural setup. The enhanced earnings
in the new place outweigh the costs of
migration; hence, expenditure on
migration is also a source of human
capital formation.
People
spend
to
acquire
information relating to the labour
market and other markets like
education and health. For example,
people want to know the level of salaries
associated with various types of jobs,
whether the educational institutions
provide the right type of employable
skills and at what cost. This information
is necessary to make decisions
regarding investments in human capital
as well as for efficient utilisation of the
acquired human capital stock.
Expenditure incurred for acquiring
information relating to the labour
market and other markets is also a
source of human capital formation.

The concept of physical capital is
the base for conceptualising human
capital. There are some similarities
between the two forms of capital; there
are some striking dissimilarities as
well. See Box 4.1.
Human Capital and Economic
Growth: Who contributes more to
national income — a worker in a factory
or a software professional? We know
that the labour skill of an educated
person is more than that of an
uneducated person and that the former
generates more income than the latter.
Economic growth means the increase
in real national income of a country;
naturally, the contribution of the
educated person to economic growth
is more than that of an illiterate person.
If a healthy person could provide

uninterrupted labour supply for a
longer period of time, then health is
also an important factor for economic
growth. Thus, both education and
health, along with many other factors
like on-the-job training, job market
information and migration, increase an

individual’s income generating
capacity.
This enhanced productivity of
human beings or human capital
contributes substantially not only
towards
increasing
labour
productivity but also stimulates
innovations and creates ability to
absorb new technologies. Education
provides knowledge to understand
changes in society and scientific
advancements, thus, facilitate
inventions and innovations. Similarly,
the availability of educated labour
force facilitates adaptation to new
technologies.
Empirical evidence to prove that
increase in human capital causes
economic growth is rather nebulous.
This may be because of measurement
problems. For example, education
measured in terms of years of
schooling, teacher-pupil ratio and
enrolment rates may not reflect the
quality of education; health services
measured in monetary terms, life
expectancy and mortality rates may
not reflect the true health status of the
people in a country. Using the
indicators mentioned above, an
analysis of improvement in education
and health sectors and growth in real
per capita income in both developing
and developed countries shows that
there is convergence in the measures
of human capital but no sign of
convergence of per capita real income.
In other words, the human capital
growth in developing countries has
been faster but the growth of per capita
real income has not been that fast.
There are reasons to believe that the

causality between human capital and
economic growth flows in either
directions. That is, higher income
causes building of high level of human
capital and vice versa, that is, high level
of human capital causes growth of
income.
India recognised the importance of
human capital in economic growth
long ago. The Seventh Five Year Plan
says, “Human resources development
(read human capital) has necessarily
to be assigned a key role in any
development strategy, particularly in
a country with a large population.
Trained and educated on sound lines,
a large population can itself become
an asset in accelerating economic
growth and in ensuring social change
in desired directions.”
It is difficult to establish a relation of
cause and effect from the growth of
human capital (education and health)
to economic growth but we can see in

Table 4.1 that these sectors have grown
simultaneously. Growth in each sector
probably has reinforced the growth of
every other sector.
The National Education Policy
2020 states that the world is
undergoing rapid changes in the
knowledge landscape. With various
dramatic scientific and technological
advances, such as the rise of big data.
machine learning, and artificial
intelligence, many unskilled jobs
worldwide may be taken over by
machines, while the need fro a skilled
workforce, particularly involving
mathematics, computer science, and
data science, in conjunction with
multidisciplinary abilities across the
sciences and social sciences, and
humanities, will be increasingly in
greater demand. With climate change,
increasing pollution, and depleting
natural resources, there will be a
sizeable shift in how we meet the world’s
energy, water, food, and sanitation
needs, again resulting in the need for
new skilled labour, particularly in
biology, chemistry, physics,
agriculture, climate science, and
social science. The growing
emergence of epidemics and
pandemics will also call for
collaborative research in infectious
disease management and
development of vaccines and the
resultant social issues heightens
the need for multidisciplinary
learning. There will be a growing
demand for humanities and art, as
India moves towards becoming a
developed country as well as
among the three largest economies in
the world. This policy vision suggests
how human capital formation in India
will move its economy to a higher
growth trajectory based on knowledge
landscape.

Box 4.2: India as a Knowledge Economy
The Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the
past two decades. Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing
views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy by
using information technology (IT). There have been some instances of villagers
using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise, e-
governance is being projected as the way of the future. The value of IT depends
greatly on the existing level of economic development. Do you think IT - based
services in rural areas will lead to human development? Discuss.


4.4 H UMAN C APITAL AND H UMAN
D EVELOPMENT
The two terms sound similar but there
is a clear distinction between them.
Human capital considers education
and health as a means to increase
labour
productivity.
Human
development is based on the idea that
education and health are integral to
human well-being because only when
people have the ability to read and
write and the ability to lead a long
and
healthy
life,
they
will be able to make other choices
which they value. Human capital
treats human beings as a means to
an end; the end being the increase
in productivity. In this view, any
investment in education and health is
unproductive if it does not enhance
output of goods and services. In the
human development perspective,
human beings are ends in themselves.
Human welfare should be increased
through investments in education and
health even if such investments do not
result in higher labour productivity.
Therefore, basic education and basic
health are important in themselves,
irrespective of their contribution to
labour productivity. In such a view,
every individual has a right to get basic
education and basic health care, that
is, every individual has a right to be
literate and lead a healthy life.


4.5 S T A T E O F H U M A N C A P I T A L
FORMATION IN INDIA
In this section we are going to analyse
human capital formation in India. We
have already learnt that human
capital formation is the outcome
of investments in education, health,
on-the-job training, migration and
information. Of these education and
health are very important sources of
human capital formation. We know
that India is a federal country with a
union government, state governments
and local governments (Municipal
Corporations, Municipalities and
Village Panchayats). The Constitution
of India mentions the functions to
be carried out by each level of
government. Accordingly, expendi-
tures on both education and health are
to be carried out simultaneously by all
the three tiers of the government.
Analysis of health sector is taken up
in Chapter 8; hence, we will analyse
only the education sector here.
Do you know who takes care of
education and health in India? Before
we take up the analysis of the education
sector in India, we will look into the
need for government intervention in
education and health sectors. We do
understand that education and health
care services create both private and
social benefits and this is the reason
for the existence of both private and
public institutions in the education and
health service markets. Expenditures
on education and health make
substantial long-term impact and they
cannot be easily reversed; hence,
government intervention is essential. For
instance, once a child is admitted to a
school or health care centre where the
required services are not provided,
before the decision is taken to shift the
child to another institution, substantial
amount of damage would have been
done. Moreover, individual consumers
of these services do not have complete
information about the quality of
services and their costs. In this
situation, the providers of education
and health services acquire monopoly
power and are involved in exploitation.
The role of government in this situation
is to ensure that the private providers of
these services adhere to the standards
stipulated by the government and
charge the correct price.
In India, the ministries of
education at the union and state level,
departments of education and various
organisations like National Council of
Educational Research and Training
(NCERT), University Grants Commission
(UGC) and All India Council of
Technical Education (AICTE) facilitate
institutions which come under the
education sector. Similarly, the
ministries of health at the union and
state level, departments of health and
various organisations like National
Medical Commission and Indian
Council for Medical Research (ICMR)
facilitate institutions which come under
the health sector.
In a developing country like India,
with a large section of the population
living below the poverty line, many
people cannot afford to access basic
education and health care facilities.
Moreover, a substantial section
of India’s population cannot afford
to reach super specialty health care
and higher education. Furthermore,
when basic education and health care
is considered as a right of the citizens,
then it is essential that the government
should provide education and health
services free of cost for the deserving
citizens and those from the socially
oppressed classes. Both, the union
and state governments, have been
stepping up expenditures in the
education sector over the years in
order to fulfil the objective of attaining
cent per cent literacy and considerably
increase the average educational
attainment of Indians.


4.6 EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA
Growth in Government Expenditure
on Education: Do you know how
much the government spends on
education? This expenditure by the
government is expressed in two ways
(i) as a percentage of ‘total government
expenditure’ (ii) as a percentage of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The percentage of ‘education
expenditure of total government
expenditure’ indicates the importance
of education in the scheme of
things before the government. The
percentage of ‘education expenditure
of GDP’ expresses how much of
people’s income is being committed to
the development of education in
the country. During 1952-2014,
education expenditure as percentage
of total government expenditure
increased from 7.92 to 15.7 and as
percentage of GDP increased from
0.64 to 4.13. Throughout this period
the increase in education expenditure
has not been uniform and there has
been irregular rise and fall. To this if
we include the private expenditure
incurred by individuals and by
philanthropic institutions, the total
education expenditure should be
much higher.
Elementary education takes a major
share of total education expenditure
and the share of the higher/tertiary
education (institutions of higher
learning like colleges, polytechnics and
universities) is the least. Though, on an
average, the government spends less
on tertiary education, ‘expenditure per
student’ in tertiary education is higher
than that of elementary. This does not
mean that financial resources should be
transferred from tertiary education to
elementary education. As we expand
school education, we need more
teachers who are trained in the higher
educational institutions; therefore,
expenditure on all levels of education
should be increased.
In 2014-15, the per capita public
expenditure on elementary education
differs considerably across states from
as high as Rs 34,651 in Himachal
Pradesh to as low as Rs 4088 in Bihar.
This leads to differences in educational
opportunities and attainments across
states.
One can understand the inadequacy
of the expenditure on education if we
compare it with the desired level of
education expenditure as recommended
by the various commissions. The
Education Commission (1964-66) had
recommended that at least 6 percent of
GDP be spent on education so as to
make a noticeable rate of growth in
educational achievements. The Tapas
Majumdar Committee, appointed by
the Government of India in 1999
estimated an expenditure of around Rs
1.37 lakh crore over 10 years (1998-
99 to 2006-07) to bring all
Indian children in the age
group of 6-14 years under
the purview of school
education. Compared to this
desired level of education
expenditure of around 6 per
cent of GDP, the current level
of a little over 4 per cent has
been quite inadequate. In
principle, a goal of 6 per cent
needs to be reached—this
has been accepted as a must
for the coming years. In 2009,
the Government of India enacted the
Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act to make
free education a fundamental right of
all children in the age grounp of 6-14
years.
Government of India has also
started levying a 2 percent 'education
cess' on all Union taxes. The revenues
from education cess has been
earmarked for spending on elementary
education. In addition to this, the
government sanctions a large outlay for
the promotion of higher education and
new loan schemes for students to
pursue higher education.
Educational Achievements in
India: Generally,
educational
achievements in a country are
indicated
in
terms
of adult literacy level, primary
education completion rate and youth
literacy rate. These statistics for the
last two decades are given above in
Table 4.2.

4.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS
Education for All — Still a Distant
Dream: Though literacy rates for both
— adults as well as youth — have
increased, still the absolute number
of illiterates in India is as much as
India’s population was at the time of
independence. In 1950, when the
Constitution of India was passed by the
Constituent Assembly, it was noted in
the Directive Principles of the
Constitution that the government
should provide free and compulsory
education for all children up to the age
of 14 years within 10 years from the
commencement of the Constitution.
Had we achieved this, we would have
cent per cent literacy by now.
Gender Equity — Better than Before:
The differences in literacy rates between
males and females are narrowing
signifying a positive development in
gender equity; still the need to promote
education for women in India is
imminent for various reasons such as
improving economic independence and
social status of women and also
because women education makes a
favourable impact on fertility rate and
health care of women and children.
Therefore, we cannot be complacent
about the upward movement in the
literacy rates and we have miles to go in
achieving cent per cent adult literacy.
Higher Education — a Few Takers:
The Indian education pyramid is
steep, indicating lesser and lesser
number of people reaching the higher
education level. Moreover, the level of
unemployment among educated youth
is the highest. As per NSSO data, in the
year 2011-12, the rate of
unemployment among youth males
who studied graduation and above in
rural areas was 19 per cent. Their urban
counterparts had relatively less level of
unemployment at 16 per cent. The most
severely affected ones were young rural
female graduates as nearly 30 per cent
of them are unemployed. In contrast to
this, only about 3-6 per cent of primary
level educated youth in rural and urban
areas were unemployed. The situation
is yet to improve as indicated by the
Periodic Labour Force Survey 2017-18.
Therefore, the government should
increase allocation for higher education
and also improve the standard of higher
education institutions, so that students
are imparted employable skills in such
institutions. When compared to less
educated, a large proportion of educated
persons are unemployed. Why?


4.8 CONCLUSION
The economic and social benefits of
human capital formation and human
development are well known. The union
and state governments in India have
been earmarking substantial financial
outlays for development of education
and health sectors. The spread of
education and health services across
different sectors of society should be
ensured so as to simultaneously attain
economic growth and equity. India has
a rich stock of scientific and technical
manpower in the world. The need of the
hour is to better it qualitatively and
provide such conditions so that they are
utilised in India.


Recap
Ø Investments in education convert human beings into human capital; human
capital represents enhanced labour productivity, which is an acquired ability
and an outcome of deliberate investment decisions with an expectation that
it will increase future income sources.
Ø Investments in education, on-the-job training, health, migration and
information are the sources of human capital formation.
Ø The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital.
There are some similarities as well as dissimilarities between the two forms
of capital formation.
Ø Investment in human capital formation is considered as efficient and growth
enhancing.
Ø Human development is based on the idea that education and health are
integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to
read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, will they be
able to make other choices which they value.
Ø The percentage of expenditure on education of the total government
expenditure indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things
for the government.
