5.1 INTRODUCTION
Previously we have studied how poverty
was a major challenge facing India. We
also know that the majority of the poor
live in rural areas where they do not
have access to the basic necessities
of life.
Agriculture is the major source of
livelihood in the rural sector. Mahatma
Gandhi once said that the real progress
of India did not mean simply the growth
and expansion of industrial urban
centres but mainly the development of
the villages. This idea of village
development being at the centre of the
overall development of the nation is
relevant even today. Why is this so?
Why should we attach such significance
to rural development when we see
around us fast growing cities with large
industries and modern information
technology hubs? It is because more
than two-third of India’s population
depends on agriculture that is yet to
become productive enough to provide
for them; one-fourth of rural India still
lives in abject poverty. That is the
reason why we have to see a developed
rural India if our nation has to realise
real progress. What, then, does rural
development imply?
5.2 WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT?
Rural development is a comprehensive
term. It essentially focuses on action for
the development of areas that are
lagging behind in the overall
development of the village economy.
Some of the areas which are
challenging and need fresh initiatives
for development in rural India include
• Development of human resources
including
– literacy, more specifically, female
literacy, education and skill
development
– health, addressing both sanitation
and public health
• Land reforms
• Development of the productive
resources of each locality
• Infrastructure development like
electricity, irrigation, credit,
marketing, transport facilities
including construction of village
roads and feeder roads to nearby
highways, facilities for agriculture
research and extension, and
information dissemination
• Special measures for alleviation
of poverty and bringing about
significant improvement in the living
conditions of the weaker sections
of the population emphasising
access to productive employment
opportunities
All this means that people engaged
in farm and non-farm activities in
rural areas have to be provided with
various means that help them increase
the productivity. They also need to be
given opportunities to diversify
into various non-farm productive
activities such as food processing.
Enabling them better and more
affordable access to healthcare,
sanitation facilities at workplaces and
homes and education for all would also
need to be given top priority for rapid
rural development.
It was observed in an earlier chapter
that although the share of agriculture
sector’s contribution to GDP was on a
decline, the population dependent on
this sector did not show any significant
change. Further, after the initiation of
reforms, the growth rate of agriculture
sector decelerated to about 3 per cent
per annum during the 1991-2012,
which was lower than the earlier years.
In recent years, this sector has become
volatile. During 2014-15, the GVA
growth rate of agriculture and its allied
sectors was less than one per cent.
Scholars identify decline in public
investment since 1991 as the major
reason for this. They also argue that
inadequate infrastructure, lack of
alternate employment opportunities in
the industry or service sector,
increasing casualisation of employment
etc., further impede rural development.
The impact of this phenomenon can be
seen from the growing distress
witnessed among farmers across
different parts of India. Against this
background, we will critically look at
some of the crucial aspects of rural
India like credit and marketing
systems, agricultural diversification
and the role of organic farming in
promoting sustainable development.
5.3 CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL
A REAS
Credit: Growth of rural economy
depends primarily on infusion of
capital, from time to time, to realise
higher productivity in agriculture and
non-agriculture sectors. As the time of
gestation period between crop sowing and
realisation of income after production is
quite long, farmers borrow from various
sources to meet their initial investment
on seeds, fertilisers, implements and
other family expenses of marriage,
death, religious ceremonies etc.
At the time of independence,
moneylenders and traders exploited
small and marginal farmers and
landless labourers by lending to them
on high interest rates and by
manipulating the accounts to keep
them in a debt-trap. A major change
occurred after 1969 when India
adopted social banking and multi-
agency approach to adequately meet
the needs of rural credit. Later, the
National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development (NABARD) was set
up in 1982 as an apex body to
coordinate the activities of all
institutions involved in the rural
financing system. The Green
Revolution was a harbinger of major
changes in the credit system as it led to
the diversification of the portfolio of
rural credit towards production-
oriented lending.
The institutional structure of rural
banking today consists of a set of
multi-agency institutions, namely,
commercial banks, regional rural banks
(RRBs), cooperatives and land
development banks. They are expected
to dispense adequate credit at cheaper
rates. Recently, Self-Help Groups
(henceforth SHGs) have emerged to fill
the gap in the formal credit system
because the formal credit delivery
mechanism has not only proven
inadequate but has also not been fully
integrated into the overall rural social
and community development. Since
some kind of collateral is required, vast
proportion of poor rural households
were automatically out of the credit
network. The SHGs promote thrift in
small proportions by a minimum
contribution from each member. From
the pooled money, credit is given to the
needy members to be repayable in
small instalments at reasonable interest
rates. By May 2019, nearly 6 crore
women in India have become member
in 54 lakh women SHGs. About ` 10-
15,000 per SHG and another `2.5 lakhs
per SHG as a Community Investment
Support Fund (CISF) are provided as part
of renovating fund to take up self
employement for income generation.
Such credit provisions are generally
referred to as micro-credit programmes.
SHGs have helped in the empowerment
of women. It is alleged that the borrowings
are mainly confined to consumption
purposes. Why are borrowers not
spending for productive purposes?
Rural Banking — a Critical Appraisal:
Rapid expansion of the banking system
had a positive effect on rural farm and
non-farm output, income and
employment, especially after the green
revolution — it helped farmers to avail
services and credit facilities and a
variety of loans for meeting their
prodution needs. Famines became
events of the past; we have now
achieved food security which is reflected
in the abundant buffer stocks of grains.
However, all is not well with our
banking system.
With the possible exception of the
commercial banks, other formal
institutions have failed to develop a
culture of deposit mobilisation —
lending to worthwhile borrowers and
effective loan recovery. Agriculture loan
default rates have been chronically
high. Why farmers failed to pay back
loans? It is alleged that farmers are
deliberately refusing to pay back
loans. What could be the reasons?
Thus, the expansion and promotion
of the rural banking sector has taken a
backseat after reforms. To improve the
situation, In recent years, all the adults
are encouraged to open bank accounts
as a part of a scheme known as Jan-
Dhan Yojana. Those bank account
holders can get Rs. 1-2 lakh accidental
insurance coverage and overdraft
facilities for Rs. 10,000 and get their
wages if they get any government-related
jobs and works under MNREGA;
old age pension and other social
security payments of the government are
transferred to bank accounts. There is no
need to keep minimum bank balance.
This has led to more than 50 crore people
opening bank accounts; indirectly it has
promoted thrift habit and efficient
allocation of financial resources
particularly in rural areas. Banks also
could mobile funds of more than Rs.
2,00,000 crores through these accounts.



Box 5.1: The Poor Women’s Bank
‘Kudumbashree’ is a women-oriented community-based poverty reduction
programme being implemented in Kerala. In 1995, a thrift and credit society
was started as a small savings bank for poor women with the objective to
encourage savings. The thrift and credit society mobilised Rs 1 crore as thrift
savings. These societies have been acclaimed as the largest informal banks in
Asia in terms of participation and savings mobilised.


5.4 AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM
Have you ever asked yourself how food
grains, vegetables and fruits that we
consume daily come from different
parts of the country? The mechanism
through which these goods reach
different places depends on the market
channels. Agricultural marketing is a
process that involves the assembling,
storage, processing, transportation,
packaging, grading and distribution
of different agricultural commodities
across the country.
Prior to independence, farmers,
while selling their produce to traders,
suffered from faulty weighing and
manipulation of accounts. Farmers who
did not have the required information on
prices prevailing in markets were often
forced to sell at low prices. They also did
not have proper storage facilities to keep
back their produce for selling later at a
better price. Do you know that even today,
more than 10 per cent of goods produced
in farms are wasted due to lack of storage?
Therefore, government intervention
became necessary to regulate the activities
of the private traders.
Let us discuss four such measures
that were initiated to improve the
marketing aspect. The first step was
regulation of markets to create orderly
and transparent marketing conditions.
By and large, this policy benefited
farmers as well as consumers. However,
there is still a need to develop about
27,000 rural periodic markets as
regulated market places to realise the
full potential of rural markets. Second
component is provision of physical
infrastructure facilities like roads,
railways, warehouses, godowns, cold
storages and processing units. The
current infrastructure facilities are quite
inadequate to meet the growing demand
and need to be improved. Cooperative
marketing, in realising fair prices for
farmers’ products, is the third aspect
of government initiative. The success
of milk cooperatives in transforming the
social and economic landscape of
Gujarat and some other parts of the
country is testimony to the role of
cooperatives. However cooperatives
have received a setback during the
recent past due to inadequate coverage
of farmer members, lack of appropriate
link between marketing and processing
cooperatives and inefficient financial
management. The fourth element is the
policy instruments like (i) assurance of
minimum support prices (MSP) for
agricultural products (ii) maintenance
of buffer stocks of wheat and rice
by Food Corporation of India and
(iii) distribution of food grains and sugar
through PDS. These instruments are
aimed at protecting the income of the
farmers and providing foodgrains at a
subsidised rate to the poor. However,
despite government intervention, private
trade (by moneylenders, rural political
elites, big merchants and rich farmers)
predominates agricultural markets. The
need for government intervention is
imminent particularly when a large
share of agricultural products, is
handled by the private sector.
Agricultural marketing has come
a long way with the intervention of the
government in various forms. Some
scholars argue that commercialisation
of agriculture offers tremendous scope
for farmers to earn higher incomes
provided the government intervention
is restricted. What do you think about
this view?
Emerging Alternate Marketing
Channels: It has been realised that if
farmers directly sell their produce to
consumers, it increases their incomes.
Some examples of these channels are
Apni Mandi (Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan); Hadaspar Mandi (Pune);
Rythu Bazars (vegetable and fruit
markets in Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana) and Uzhavar Sandies
(farmers markets in Tamil Nadu).
Further, several national and
multinational fast food chains are
increasingly entering into contracts/
alliances with farmers to encourage
them to cultivate farm products
(vegetables, fruits, etc.) of the desired
quality by providing them with not only
seeds and other inputs but also assured
procurement of the produce at pre-
decided prices. It is argued that such
arrangements will help in reducing the
price risks of farmers and would also
expand the markets for farm products.
Do you think such arrangements raise
incomes of small farmers.
In 2020, Indian Parliament passed
three laws to reform agriculture
marketing system. While some section
of farmers support these reforms, the
rest of the farmers oppose and these
Acts are still being debated. Collect
the details of these laws, debate and
discuss in the class.

Box 5.2: Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA)
Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) was a project initiated in the late 1980s
in Tamil Nadu to train women in latest agricultural techniques and in organic farming.
It encouraged women to actively participate in raising agricultural productivity and
family income. At a Farm Women’s Group in Thiruchirapalli, run by Anthoniammal,
trained women are successfully making and selling vermicompost and earning money
from this venture. Many other Farm Women’s Groups are creating savings in their
group by functioning like mini banks through a micro-credit system. With the
accumulated savings, they promote small-scale household activities like mushroom
cultivation, soap manufacture, doll making or other income-generating activities.
There could be similar initiatives in your area or your neighborhood rural areas.
Talk to organisation or women entrepreneurs and discuss the details in the class.


5.5 DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE ACTIVITIES
Diversification includes two aspects -
one relates to change in cropping
pattern and the other relates to a shift
of workforce from agriculture to other
allied activities (livestock, poultry,
fisheries etc.) and non-agriculture
sector. The need for diversification
arises from the fact that there is
greater risk in depending exclusively
on
farming
for
livelihood.
Diversification towards new areas is
necessary not only to reduce the risk
from agriculture sector but also to
provide productive sustainable
livelihood options to rural people.
Much of the agricultural employment
activities are concentrated in the
Kharif season. But during the Rabi
season, in areas where there are
inadequate irrigation facilities, it
becomes difficult to find gainful
employment. Therefore expansion
into other sectors is essential to
provide supplementary gainful
employment and in realising higher
levels of income for rural people to
overcome poverty and other
tribulations. Hence, there is a need to
focus on allied activities, non-farm
employment and other emerging
alternatives of livelihood, though
there are many other options available
for providing sustainable livelihoods
in rural areas.

As agriculture is already
overcrowded, a major proportion of the
increasing labour force needs to find
alternate employment opportunities in
other non-farm sectors. Non-farm
economy has several segments in it;
some possess dynamic linkages that
permit healthy growth while others are
in subsistence, low productivity
propositions. The dynamic sub-sectors
include agro-processing industries,
food processing industries, leather
industry, tourism, etc. Those sectors
which have the potential but seriously
lack infrastructure and other
support include traditional
home-based industries like
pottery, crafts, handlooms etc.
Majority of rural women find
employment in agriculture while
men generally look for non-farm
employment. In recent times,
women have also begun looking
for non-farm jobs (see Box 5.2).
Animal Husbandry: In India,
the farming community uses the
mixed crop-livestock farming
system —cattle, goats, fowl
are the widely held species. Livestock
production provides increased stability
in income, food security, transport, fuel
and nutrition for the family without
disrupting other food-producing
activities. Today, livestock sector alone
provides alternate livelihood options to
over 70 million small and marginal
farmers including landless labourers. A
significant number of women also find
employment in the livestock sector.
Chart 5.1 shows the distribution of
livestock in India. Poultry accounts for
the largest share with 61 per cent
followed by others. Other animals which
include camels, asses, horses, ponies
and mules are in the lowest rung. India
had about 303 million cattle, including
110 million buffaloes in 2019.
Performance of the Indian dairy sector
over the last three decades has been
quite impressive. Milk production in
the country has increased by about ten
times between 1951-2016. This can
be attributed mainly to the successful
implementation of ‘Operation Flood’. It
is a system whereby all the farmers can
pool their milk produced according to
different grading (based on quality),
processed and marketed to urban
centres through cooperatives. In this
system the farmers are assured of a fair
price and income from the supply of
milk to urban markets. As pointed out
earlier Gujarat state is held as a
success story in the efficient
implementation of milk cooperatives
which has been emulated by many
states. Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh,
Andhra
Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan,
are major milk producing states. Meat,
eggs, wool and other by- products are
also emerging as important productive
sectors for diversification.

Fisheries: The fishing community
regards the water body as ‘mother’ or
‘provider’. The water bodies consisting
of sea, oceans, rivers, lakes, natural
aquatic ponds, streams etc. are,
therefore, an integral and life-giving
source for the fishing community. In
India, after progressive increase in
budgetary allocations and introduction
of new technologies in fisheries and
aquaculture, the development of
fisheries has come a long way.
Presently, fish production from inland
sources contributes about 65 per cent
to the total value of fish production and
the balance 35 per cent comes from the
marine sector (sea and oceans). Today
total fish production accounts for
0.9 per cent of the total GDP. In India,
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu
are major fish producing states. A large
share of fishworker families are poor.
Rampant underemployment, low per
capita earnings, absence of mobility
of labour to other sectors and a high
rate of illiteracy and indebtedness are
some of the major problems fishing
community face today. Even though
women are not involved in active
fishing, about 60 per cent of the
workforce in export marketing and 40
per cent in internal marketing are
women. There is a need to increase
credit facilities through cooperatives
and SHGs for fisherwomen to meet the
working capital requirements for
marketing.
Horticulture: Blessed with a varying
climate and soil conditions, India has
adopted growing of diverse horti-
cultural crops such as fruits,
vegetables, tuber crops, flowers,
medicinal and aromatic plants, spices
and plantation crops. These crops play
a vital role in providing food and
nutrition, besides addressing
employment concerns. Horticulture
sector contributes nearly one-third of
the value of agriculture output and
six per cent of Gross Domestic Product
of India. India has emerged as a world
leader in producing a variety of fruits
like mangoes, bananas, coconuts,
cashew nuts and a number of spices
and is the second largest producer of
fruits and vegetables. Economic
condition of many farmers engaged in
horticulture has improved and it has
become a means of improving
livelihood for many unprivileged
classes. Flower harvesting, nursery
maintenance, hybrid seed production
and tissue culture, propagation of
fruits and flowers and food processing
are highly remunerative employment
options for women in rural areas.
Though, in terms of numbers, our
livestock population is quite
impressive but its productivity is quite
low as compared to other countries. It
requires improved technology and
promotion of good breeds of animals
to enhance productivity. Improved
veterinary care and credit
facilities to small and
marginal farmers and
landless labourers would
enhance
sustainable
livelihood options through
livestock
production.
Production of fisheries has
already
increased
substantially.
However
problems
related to over- fishing and
pollution need to be regulated

and controlled. Welfare programmes for
the fishing community have to be
reoriented in a manner which can provide
long-term gains and sustenance of
livelihoods. Horticulture has emerged as
a successful sustainable livelihood
option and needs to be encouraged
significantly. Enhancing its role requires
investment in infrastructure like
electricity, cold storage systems,
marketing linkages, small-scale
processing units and technology
improvement and dissemination.
Other Alternate Livelihood Options:
The IT has revolutionised many sectors
in the Indian economy. There is broad
consensus that IT can play a critical
role in achieving sustainable
development and food security in the
twenty-first century. Governments can
predict areas of food insecurity and
vulnerability using appropriate
information and software tools so that
action can be taken to prevent or
reduce the likelihood of an emergency.
It also has a positive impact on the
agriculture sector as it can disseminate
information regarding emerging
technologies and its applications,
prices, weather and soil conditions for
growing different crops etc. Though
IT is, by itself, no catalyst of change
but it can act as a tool for releasing
the creative potential and knowledge
embedded in the society. It also has
potential of employment generation in
rural areas. Experiments with IT and
its application to rural development are
carried out in different parts of India.

Box 5.3: Adoption of Village by Parliamentarians
In October, 2014, The Government of India introduced a new scheme called
Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). Under this scheme, Members of India's
Parliament need to identify and develop one village from their constituencies. To
begin with, MPs can develop one village as a model village by 2016, and two more
by 2019, covering over 2,500 villages in India. According to the scheme, the village
can have a population of 3,000-5,000 in the plains and 1,000-3,000 in the hills
and should not be MPs' own or their spouse's village. MPs are expected to facilitate
a village development plan, motivate villagers to take up activities and built
infrastructure in the areas of health, nutrition and education.

Box 5.4: Organic Food
Organic food is growing in popularity across the world. Many countries have
around 10 per cent of their food system under organic farming. There are many
retail chains and supermarkets which are accorded with green status to sell
organic food. Moreover, organic foods command higher price of around 10-100
per cent than conventional ones.


5.6 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANIC FARMING
In recent years, awareness of the
harmful effect of chemical-based
fertilisers and pesticides on our health
is on a rise. Conventional agriculture
relies heavily on chemical fertilisers
and toxic pesticides etc., which enter
the food supply, penetrate the water
sources, harm the livestock, deplete the
soil and devastate natural eco-systems.
Efforts in evolving technologies which
are eco-friendly are essential for
sustainable development and one
such technology which is eco-friendly
is organic farming. In short, organic
agriculture is a whole system of
farming that restores, maintains and
enhances the ecological balance. There
is an increasing demand for
organically grown food to enhance
food safety throughout the world (see
Box 5.4).
Benefits of Organic Farming:
Organic agriculture offers a means to
substitute costlier agricultural inputs
(such as HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers,
pesticides etc.) with locally produced
organic inputs that are cheaper and
thereby generate good returns on
investment. Organic agriculture also
generates income through exports as
the demand for organically grown crops
is on a rise. Studies across countries
have shown that organically grown food
has more nutritional value than
chemical farming thus providing us
with healthy foods. Since organic
farming requires more labour input
than conventional farming, India will
find organic farming an attractive
proposition. Finally, the produce is
pesticide-free and produced in an
environmentally sustainable way (see
Box 5.5).
Popularising organic farming
requires awareness and willingness on
the part of farmers to adapt to new
technology. Inadequate infrastructure
and the problem of marketing the
products are major concerns which
need to be addressed apart from an
appropriate agriculture policy to
promote organic farming. It has been
observed that the yields from organic
farming are less than modern
agricultural farming in the initial years.
Therefore, small and marginal farmers
may find it difficult to adapt to large-
scale production. Organic produce may
also have more blemishes and a shorter
shelf life than sprayed produce.
Moreover choice in production of
off-season crops is quite limited in
organic farming. Nevertheless, organic
farming helps in sustainable
development of agriculture and India
has a clear advantage in producing
organic products for both domestic and
international markets. Do you think
food and non-food items cultivated
using organic farming methods will be
cheaper?

Box 5.5: Organically Produced Cotton in Maharashtra
In 1995, when Kisan Mehta of Prakruti (an NGO) first suggested that cotton,
the biggest user of chemical pesticides, could be grown organically, the then
Director of the Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, famously remarked,
“Do you want India to go naked?” At present, as many as 130 farmers have
committed 1,200 hectares of land to grow cotton organically on the International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement’s standards. The produce was
later tested by the German Accredited Agency, AGRECO, and found to be of
high quality. Kisan Mehta feels that about 78 per cent of Indian farmers are
marginal farmers owning about less than 0.8 hectare but accounting for 20 per
cent of India’s cultivable land. For such farmers, organic agriculture is more
profitable in terms of money and soil conservation in the long run. Visit a farm
in your locality which uses organic manure and discuss the uses associated
with the farming practices. Present the report in your class.

5.7 CONCLUSION
It is clear that until and unless some
spectacular changes occur, the rural
sector might continue to remain
backward. There is a greater need
today to make rural areas more
vibrant through diversification into
dairying,
poultry,
fisheries,
vegetables and fruits and linking up
the rural production centres with the
urban and foreign (export) markets
to realise higher returns on the
investments for the products.
Moreover, infrastructure elements
like credit and marketing, farmer-
friendly agricultural policies and a
constant appraisal and dialogue
between farmers’ groups and state
agricultural departments are
essential to realise the full potential
of the sector.
Today we cannot look at the
environment and rural development as
two distinct subjects. There is need to
invent or procure alternate sets of eco-
friendly technologies that lead to
sustainable development in different
circumstances. From these, each rural
community can choose whatever will
suit its purpose. We need to learn
from, and also try out when found
relevant, practices from the available
set of ‘best practice’ illustrations (which
means success stories of rural
development experiments that have
already been carried out in similar
conditions in different parts of India),
to speed up this process of ‘learning
by doing’.

Recap
Ø Rural development is quite a comprehensive term but it essentially means
a plan of action for the development of rural areas which are lagging
behind in socio-economic development.
Ø There is a need for improving the quantity and quality of infrastructure
in rural areas such as banking, marketing, storage, transport and
communications etc. to realise its true potential.
Ø Diversification towards new areas such as livestock, fisheries and other
non-agricultural activities is necessary not only to reduce the risk from
agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood
options to our rural people.
Ø The importance of organic farming as an environmentally sustainable
production process is on a rise and needs to be promoted.
