8.1 INTRODUCTION
In the preceding units we studied the
developmental experience of India in
detail. We also studied the kind of
policies India adopted, which had
varying impacts in different sectors.
Over the last two decades or so, the
economic transformation that is taking
place in different countries across the
world, partly because of the process
of globalisation, has both short as
well as long-term implications for
each country, including India. Nations
have been primarily trying to adopt
various means which will strengthen
their own domestic economies. To this
effect, they are forming regional and
global economic groupings such as
the SAARC, European Union,
ASEAN, G-8, G-20, BRICS etc. In
addition, there is also an increasing
eagerness on the parts of various
nations to try and understand the
developmental processes pursued by
their neighbouring nations as it
allows them to better comprehend
their own strengths and weaknesses
vis-à-vis their neighbours. In the
unfolding process of globalisation,
this is particularly considered
essential by developing countries as
they face competition not only from
developed nations but also amongst
themselves in the relatively limited
economic space enjoyed by the
developing world. Besides, an
understanding of the other economies
in our neighbourhood is also required
as all major common economic
activities in the region impinge on
overall human development in a
shared environment.
In this chapter we will compare the
developmental strategies pursued by
India and the largest two of its
neighbouring economies—Pakistan
and China. It has to be remembered
that despite being endowed with vast
natural resources, there is little
similarity between the political power
setup of India - the largest democracy
of the world which is wedded to a
secular and deeply liberal Constitution
for more than half a century, and the
militarist political power structure of
Pakistan or the command economy
of China that has only recently
started moving towards a democratic
system and more liberal economic
restructuring respectively.
8.2
DEVELOPMENTAL
SNAPSHOT VIEW
P A T H —A
Do you know that India, Pakistan and
China have many similarities in their
developmental strategies? All the three
nations have started towards their
developmental path at the same time.
While India and Pakistan became
independent nations in 1947, People’s
Republic of China was established in
1949. In a speech at that time,

Jawaharlal Nehru had said, “These
new and revolutionary changes in
China and India, even though they
differ in content, symbolise the new
spirit of Asia and new vitality which is
finding expression in the countries in
Asia.”
All three countries had started
planning their development strategies
in similar ways. While India
announced its first Five Year Plan for
1951–56, Pakistan announced its first
five year plan, now called the Medium
Term Development Plan, in 1956.
China announced its First Five Year
Plan in 1953. Since 2018, Pakistan is
working on the basis of 12th Five Year
Development Plan (2018–23), whereas,
China is working on 14th Five Year
Plan (2021–25). Until March 2017,
India has been following Five Year
Plan- based development model. India
and Pakistan adopted similar
strategies, such as creating a large
public sector and raising public
expenditure on social development.
Till the 1980s, all the three countries
had similar growth rates and per capita
incomes. Where do they stand today
in comparison to one another? Before
we answer this question, let us trace
the historical path of developmental
policies in China and Pakistan. After
studying the last three units, we
already know what policies India has
been adopting since its Independence.
China: After the establishment of
People’s Republic of China under one-
party rule, all critical sectors of the
economy, enterprises and lands owned
and operated by individuals were
brought under government control.
The Great Leap Forward (GLF)
campaign initiated in 1958 aimed at
industrialising the country on a
massive scale. People were encouraged
to set up industries in their backyards.
In rural areas, communes were
started. Under the Commune system,
people collectively cultivated lands. In
1958, there were 26,000 communes
covering almost all the farm
population.
GLF campaign met with many
problems. A severe drought caused
havoc in China killing about 30 million
people. When Russia had conflicts with
China, it withdrew its professionals
who had earlier been sent to China to
help in the industrialisation process.
In 1965, Mao introduced the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution
(1966–76) under which students and
professionals were sent to work and
learn from the countryside.
The present day fast industrial
growth in China can be traced back to
the reforms introduced in 1978. China
introduced reforms in phases. In the
initial phase, reforms were initiated in
agriculture, foreign trade and
investment sectors. In agriculture, for
instance, commune lands were divided
into small plots, which were allocated
(for use not ownership) to individual
households. They were allowed to keep
all income from the land after paying
stipulated taxes. In the later phase,
reforms were initiated in the industrial
sector. Private sector firms, in general,
and township and village enterprises,
i.e., those enterprises which were
owned and operated by local collectives,
in particular, were allowed to produce

goods. At this stage, enterprises owned
by government (known as State Owned
Enterprises—SOEs), which we, in
India, call public sector enterprises,
were made to face competition. The
reform process also involved dual
pricing. This means fixing the prices in
two ways; farmers and industrial units
were required to buy and sell fixed
quantities of inputs and outputs on the
basis of prices fixed by the government
and the rest were purchased and sold
at market prices. Over the years, as
production increased, the proportion of
goods or inputs transacted in the
market also increased. In order to
attract foreign investors, special
economic zones were set up.
Pakistan: While looking at various
economic policies that Pakistan
adopted, you will notice many
similarities with India. Pakistan also
follows the mixed economy model with
co-existence of public and private
sectors. In the late 1950s and 1960s,
Pakistan introduced a variety of
regulated policy framework (for import
substitution-based industrialisation).
The policy combined tariff protection for
manufacturing of consumer goods
together with direct import controls on
competing imports. The introduction of
Green Revolution led to mechanisation
and increase in public investment in
infrastructure in select areas, which
finally led to a rise in the production of
foodgrains. This changed the agrarian
structure dramatically. In the 1970s,
nationalisation of capital goods
industries took place. Pakistan then
shifted its policy orientation in the late
1970s and 1980s when the major
thrust areas were denationalisation
and encouragement of private sector.
During this period, Pakistan also
received financial support from western
nations and remittances from

continuously increasing outflow of
emigrants to the Middle-east. This
helped the country in stimulating
economic growth. The then government
also offered incentives to the private
sector. All this created a conducive
climate for new investments. In 1988,
reforms were initiated in the country.
Having studied a brief outline of
the developmental strategies of China
and Pakistan, let us now compare
some of the developmental indicators
of India, China and Pakistan.
8.3 DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS
If we look at the global population, out
of every six persons living in this
world, one is an Indian and another a
Chinese. We shall compare some
demographic indicators of India,
China and Pakistan. The population
of Pakistan is very small and accounts
for roughly about one-tenth of China
or India.
Though China is the largest nation
and geographically occupies the largest
area among the three nations, its
density is the lowest. Table 8.1 shows
the population growth as being the
highest in Pakistan, followed by India
and China. Scholars point out the one-
child norm introduced in China in the
late 1970s as the major reason for low
population growth. They also state that
this measure led to a decline in the sex
ratio, the proportion of females per
1000 males. However, from the table,
you will notice that the sex ratio is low
and biased against females in all three
countries. Scholars cite son preference
prevailing in all these countries as the
reason. In recent times, all three
countries are adopting various
measures to improve the situation. One-
child norm and the resultant arrest in
the growth of population also have other
implications. For instance, after a few
decades, in China, there will be more
elderly people in proportion to young
people. This led China to allow couples
to have two children.
The fertility rate is also low in
China and very high in Pakistan.
Urbanisation is high in China with
India having 34 per cent of its people
living in urban areas.



8.4 GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT AND SECTORS

One of the much-talked
issues around the world
about China is its growth
of Gross Domestic
Product. China has the
second largest GDP (PPP)
of $22.5 trillion in the
world, whereas, India’s
GDP (PPP) is $9.03
trillion and Pakistan’s
GDP is $ 0.94 trillion,
roughly about 11 per
cent of India’s GDP.
India’s GDP is about 41
per cent of China’s GDP.
When many developed countries
were finding it difficult to maintain a
growth rate of even 5 per cent, China
was able to maintain near double-digit
growth during 1980s as can be seen
from Table 8.2. Also, notice that in the
1980s, Pakistan was ahead of India;
China was having double-digit growth
and India was at the bottom. In 2015–17,
there has been a decline in Pakistan



and China’s growth rates, whereas,
India met with moderate increase in
growth rates. Some scholars hold the
reform processes introduced in
Pakistan and political instability over
a long period as reasons behind the
declining growth rate in Pakistan. We
will study in a later section which
sector contributed to different growth
rates in these countries.
First, look at how people engaged in
different sectors contribute to the Gross
Domestic Product now called as Gross
Value Added. It was pointed out in the
previous section that China and
Pakistan have more
proportion of
urban population than
India. In China, due to
topographic and climatic
conditions, the area
suitable for cultivation is
relatively small — only
about 10 per cent of its
total land area. The total
cultivable area in China
accounts for 40 per cent
of the cultivable area in
India. Until the 1980s,
more than 80 per cent of
the people in China were
dependent on farming
as their sole source
of livelihood. Since
then, the government
encouraged people
to leave their fields
and pursue other
activities such as
handicrafts, commerce
and transport. In 2018–
19, with 26 per cent of its workforce
engaged in agriculture, its contribution
to the GVA in China is 7 per cent (see
Table 8.3).
In both India and Pakistan, the
contribution of agriculture to GVA were
16 and 24 per cent, respectively, but
the proportion of workforce that works
in this sector is more in India. In
Pakistan, about 41 per cent of people
work in agriculture, whereas, in India,
it is 43 per cent. Twenty four per cent
of Pakistan workforce is engaged in
industry but it produces 19 per cent
of GVA. In India, industry workforce
account for 25 per cent but produces
goods worth 30 per cent of GVA. In
China, industries contribute to GVA at
41, and employ 28 per cent of
workforce. In all the three countries,
service sector contributes highest share
of GVA.
In the normal course of
development, countries first shift their
employment and output from
agriculture to Industry and then to
services. This is what is happening in
China as can be seen from Table 8.3.
The proportion of workforce engaged
in industry in India and Pakistan were
low at 25 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively. The contribution of
industries to GVA is at 30 per cent in
India and 19 per cent in Pakistan. In
these countries, the shift is taking place
directly to the service sector.
Thus, in all the three countries the
service sector is emerging as a major
player of development. It contributes
more to GVA and, at the same time,
emerges as a prospective employer. If
we look at the proportion of workforce
in the1980s, Pakistan was faster in
shifting its workforce to service sector
than India and China. In the 1980s,
India, China and Pakistan employed
17, 12 and 27 per cent of its workforce
in the service sector respectively. In
2019, it has reached the level of 32,
46 and 35 per cent, respectively.
In the last five decades, the
growth of agriculture sector, which
employs the largest proportion of
workforce in all the three countries, has
declined. In the industrial sector, China
has maintained a near double-digit
growth rate in 1980s but began
showing decline in recent years,
whereas, for India and Pakistan growth
rate has declined. In case of service
sector, China was able to maintain its
rate of growth during 1980–1990,while
there was a positive and increasing
growth of India’s service sector output.
Thus, China’s growth is contributed
by the manufacturing and service
sectors and India’s growth by the
service sector. During this period,
Pakistan has shown deceleration in all
three sectors.
8.5
INDICATORS OF HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT
You might have studied about the
importance of human development
indicators in the lower classes and the
position of many developed and
developing countries. Let us look how
India, China and Pakistan have
performed in some of the select
indicators of human development.
Look at Table 8.5.

Table 8.5 shows that China is
moving ahead of India and Pakistan.
This is true for many indicators —
income indicator such as GDP per
capita, or proportion of population
below poverty line or health indicators
such as mortality rates, access to
sanitation, literacy, life expectancy or
malnourishment. China and Pakistan
are ahead of India in reducing
proportion of people below the poverty
line and also their performance in
sanitation. But India and Pakistan
have not been able to save women from
maternal mortality. In China, for one
lakh births, only 29 women die
whereas in India and Pakistan, about
133 and 140 women die respectively.
Surprisingly all the three countries
report providing improved drinking
water sources for most of its
population. China has the smallest
share of poor among the three
countries. Find out for yourself how
these differences occur.
In dealing with or making
judgements on such questions,
however, we should also note a problem
while using the human development
indicators given above with conviction.
This occurs because these are all
extremely important indicators; but
these are not sufficient. Along with
these, we also need what may be called
‘liberty indicators’. One such indicator
has actually been added as a measure
of ‘the extent of democratic
participation in social and political
decision-making’ but it has not been
given any extra weight. Some obvious
‘liberty indicators’ like measures of ‘the
extent of Constitutional protection
given to rights of citizens’ or ‘the extent
of constitutional protection of
the Independence of the Judiciary and
the Rule of Law’ have not even
been introduced so far. Without
including these (and perhaps some
more) and giving them overriding
importance in the list, the construction
of a human development index may
be said to be incomplete and its
usefulness limited.
8.6 DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES — AN
APPRAISAL
It is common to find developmental
strategies of a country as a model to
others for lessons and guidance for
their own development. It is particularly
evident after the introduction of the
reform process in different parts of the
world. In order to learn from economic
performance of our neighbouring
countries, it is necessary to have an
understanding of the roots of their
successes and failures. It is also
necessary to distinguish between, and
contrast, the different phases of their
strategies. Though countries go
through their development phases
differently, let us take the initiation of
reforms as a point of reference. We
know that reforms were initiated in
China in 1978, Pakistan in 1988 and
India in 1991. Let us briefly assess their
achievements and failures in pre- and
post-reform periods.
Why did China introduce
structural reforms in 1978? China did
not have any compulsion to introduce


reforms as dictated by the World Bank
and International Monetary Fund to
India and Pakistan. The new
leadership at that time in China was
not happy with the slow pace of growth
and lack of modernisation in the
Chinese economy under the Maoist
rule. They felt that Maoist vision of
economic development based on
decentralisation, self sufficiency and
shunning of foreign technology, goods
and capital had failed. Despite
extensive land reforms, collectivisation,
the Great Leap Forward and other
initiatives, the per capita grain output
in 1978 was the same as it was in the
mid-1950s.
It was found that establishment of
infrastructure in the areas of
education and health, land reforms,
long existence of decentralised
planning and existence of small
enterprises had helped positively in
improving the social and income
indicators in the post reform period.
Before the introduction of reforms,
there had already been massive
extension of basic health services in
rural areas. Through the commune
system, there was more equitable
distribution of food grains. Experts
also point out that each reform
measure was first implemented at a
smaller level and then extended on a
massive scale. The experimentation
under decentralised government
enabled to assess the economic, social
and political costs of success or failure.
For instance, when reforms were made
in agriculture, as pointed out earlier
by handing over plots of land to
individuals for cultivation, it brought
prosperity to a vast number of poor
people. It created conditions for the
subsequent phenomenal growth in
rural industries and built up a strong
support base for more reforms.
Scholars quote many such examples
on how reform measures led to rapid
growth in China.
Scholars argue that in Pakistan
the reform process led to worsening of
all the economic indicators. We have
seen in an earlier section that
compared to 1980s, the growth rate
of GDP and its sectoral constituents
have not yet improved.
Though the data on international
poverty line for Pakistan is quite
healthy, scholars using the official
data of Pakistan indicate rising
poverty there. The proportion of poor
in 1960s was more than 40 per cent
which declined to 25 per cent in 1980s
and started rising again in the recent
decades. The reasons for the slow-
down of growth and re-emergence of
poverty in Pakistan’s economy, as
scholars put it, are agricultural growth
and food supply situation were based
not on an institutionalised process of
technical change but on good harvest.
When there was a good harvest, the
economy was in good condition, when
it was not, the economic indicators
showed stagnation or negative trends.
You will recall that India had to borrow
from the IMF and World Bank to
set right its balance of payments
crisis; foreign exchange is an essential
component for any country and it is

important to know how it can be
earned. If a country is able to build up
its foreign exchange earnings by
sustainable export of manufactured
goods, it need not worry. In Pakistan
most foreign exchange earnings came
from remittances from Pakistani
workers in the Middle-east and the
exports of highly volatile agricultural
products; there was also growing
dependence on foreign loans on the one
hand and increasing difficulty in paying
back the loans on the other.
However, during the last few years,
Pakistan has recovered its economic
growth and has been sustaining. In
2017-18, the Annual Plan 2019-20
reports that, the GDP registered a
growth of 5.5 per cent, highest when
compared to the previous decade. While
agriculture recorded growth rate far
from satisfactory level, industrial and
service sectors grew at 4.9 and 6.2 per
cent respectively. Many macroeconomic
indicators also began to show stable
and positive trends.
8.7 CONCLUSION
What are we learning from the
developmental experiences of our
neighbours? India, China and
Pakistan have travelled seven decades
of developmental path with varied
results. Till the late 1970s, all of them
were maintaining the same level of low
development. The last three decades
have taken these countries to different
levels. India, with democratic
institutions, performed moderately,
but a majority of its people still depend
on agriculture. India has taken many
initiatives to develop the infrastructure
and improve the standard of living.
Scholars are of the opinion that
political instability, over-dependence
on remittances and foreign aid along
with volatile performance of
agriculture sector are the reasons for
the slowdown of the Pakistan
economy. Yet, last five years, many
macroeconomic indicators began
showing positive and moderate growth
rates reflecting the economic recovery.
In China, the lack of political freedom
and its implications for human rights
are major concerns; yet, in the last four
decades, it used the ‘market system
without losing political commitment’
and succeeded in raising the level of
growth alongwith alleviation of poverty.
You will also notice that unlike India
and Pakistan, which are attempting to
privatise their public sector
enterprises, China has used the
market mechanism to ‘create
additional social and economic
opportunities’. By retaining collective
ownership of land and allowing
individuals to cultivate lands, China
has ensured social security in rural
areas. Public intervention in providing
social infrastructure even prior to
reforms has brought about positive
results in human development
indicators in China.


Recap
Ø With the unfolding of the globalisation process, developing countries
are keen to understand the developmental processes pursued by their
neighbours as they face competition from developed nations as also
amongst themselves.
Ø India, Pakistan and China have similar physical endowments but
totally different political systems.
Ø All the three countries follow the similar planned pattern of
development. However, the structures established to implement
developmental policies are quite different.
Ø Till the early 1980s, the developmental indicators of all the three
countries, such as growth rates and sectoral contribution towards
national income, were similar.
Ø Reforms were introduced in 1978 in China, in 1988 in Pakistan and in
1991 in India.
Ø China introduced structural reforms on its own initiative while they
were forced upon India and Pakistan by international agencies.
Ø The impact of policy measures were different in these countries — for
instance, one-child norm has arrested the population growth in China
whereas in India and Pakistan, a major change is yet to take place.
Ø Even after seventy years of planned development, majority of the
workforce in all the countries depends on agriculture. The dependency
is greater in India.
Ø Though China has followed the classical development pattern of
gradual shift from agriculture to manufacturing and then to services,
India and Pakistan’s shift has been directly from agriculture to service
sector.
Ø China’s industrial sector has maintained a high growth rate while it
is not so in both India and Pakistan. This led to rapid increase of the
GDP per capita in China than in India and Pakistan.
Ø China is ahead of India and Pakistan on many human development
indicators. However these improvements were attributed not to the
reform process but the strategies that China adopted in the pre-reform
period.
Ø While assessing the developmental indicators, one also has to consider
the liberty indicators.
